<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough (Vol. 2 of 2)</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>November 12, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">41359</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="ru"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-10-12">November 12, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Comparative Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">In Two Volumes.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. II.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1894</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>continued</hi>).</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='12. The corn-spirit as an animal.'/>
<head>§ 10.&mdash;The corn-spirit as an animal.</head>

<p>
In some of the examples cited above to establish
the meaning of the term <q>neck</q> as applied to the last
sheaf, the corn-spirit appears in animal form as a
gander, a goat, a hare, a cat, and a fox. This introduces
us to a new aspect of the corn-spirit, which we
must now examine. By doing so we shall not only
have fresh examples of killing the god, but may hope
also to clear up some points which remain obscure in
the myths and worship of Attis, Adonis, Osiris,
Dionysus, Demeter, and Virbius.
</p>

<p>
Amongst the many animals whose forms the corn-spirit
is supposed to take are the wolf, dog, hare, cock,
goose, cat, goat, cow (ox, bull), pig, and horse. In
one or other of these forms the corn-spirit is believed
to be present in the corn, and to be caught or killed in
the last sheaf. As the corn is being cut the animal
flees before the reapers, and if a reaper is taken ill
on the field, he is supposed to have stumbled unwittingly
on the corn-spirit, who has thus punished the
profane intruder. It is said <q>The Rye-wolf has got hold
of him,</q> <q>the Harvest-goat has given him a push.</q>
The person who cuts the last corn or binds the
last sheaf gets the name of the animal, as the Rye-wolf,
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
the Rye-sow, the Oats-goat, etc., and retains the
name sometimes for a year. Also the animal is frequently
represented by a puppet made out of the last
sheaf or of wood, flowers, etc., which is carried home
amid rejoicings on the last harvest waggon. Even
where the last sheaf is not made up in animal shape, it
is often called the Rye-wolf, the Hare, Goat, and so on.
Generally each kind of crop is supposed to have its
special animal, which is caught in the last sheaf, and
called the Rye-wolf, the Barley-wolf, the Oats-wolf,
the Pea-wolf, or the Potato-wolf, according to the
crop; but sometimes the figure of the animal is only
made up once for all at getting in the last crop of the
whole harvest. Sometimes the animal is believed to
be killed by the last stroke of the sickle or scythe.
But oftener it is thought to live so long as there is
corn still unthreshed, and to be caught in the last sheaf
threshed. Hence the man who gives the last stroke
with the flail is told that he has got the Corn-sow,
the Threshing-dog, etc. When the threshing is
finished, a puppet is made in the form of the animal,
and this is carried by the thresher of the last sheaf to
a neighbouring farm, where the threshing is still going
on. This again shows that the corn-spirit is believed
to live wherever the corn is still being threshed.
Sometimes the thresher of the last sheaf himself represents
the animal; and if the people of the next farm,
who are still threshing, catch him, they treat him
like the animal he represents, by shutting him up in
the pig-sty, calling him with the cries commonly
addressed to pigs, and so forth.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, pp. 1-6.</note>
</p>

<p>
These general statements will now be illustrated
by examples. We begin with the corn-spirit conceived
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
as a wolf or a dog. This conception is
common in France, Germany, and Slavonic countries.
Thus, when the wind sets the corn in wave-like
motion, the peasants often say, <q>The Wolf
is going over, or through, the corn,</q> <q>the Rye-wolf
is rushing over the field,</q> <q>the Wolf is in the corn,</q>
<q>the mad Dog is in the corn,</q> <q>the big Dog is
there.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi> (Danzig, 1865), p. 5; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald-und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi> p. 103; Witzschel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus
Thüringen</hi>, p. 213.</note> When children wish to go into the corn-fields
to pluck ears or gather the blue corn-flowers,
they are warned not to do so, for <q>the big Dog sits
in the corn,</q> or <q>the Wolf sits in the corn, and will
tear you in pieces,</q> <q>the Wolf will eat you.</q> The
wolf against whom the children are warned is not
a common wolf, for he is often spoken of as the
Corn-wolf, Rye-wolf, etc.; thus they say, <q>The Rye-wolf
will come and eat you up, children,</q> <q>the Rye-wolf
will carry you off,</q> and so forth.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf u. Roggenhund</hi>,
p. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p.
319.</note> Still he has all
the outward appearance of a wolf. For in the neighbourhood
of Feilenhof (East Prussia), when a wolf
was seen running through a field, the peasants used to
watch whether he carried his tail in the air or
dragged it on the ground. If he dragged it on the
ground, they went after him, and thanked him for
bringing them a blessing, and even set tit-bits before
him. But if he carried his tail high, they cursed him
and tried to kill him. Here the wolf is the corn-spirit,
whose fertilising power is in his tail.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf</hi>, etc. p.
10.</note>
</p>

<p>
Both dog and wolf appear as embodiments of the
corn-spirit in harvest-customs. Thus in some parts
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
of Silesia the person who binds the last sheaf is
called the Wheat-dog or the Peas-pug.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 104.</note> But it
is in the harvest-customs of the north-east of France
that the idea of the Corn-dog comes out most
clearly. Thus when a harvester, through sickness,
weariness, or laziness, cannot or will not keep up with
the reaper in front of him, they say, <q>The White
Dog passed near him,</q> <q>he has the White Bitch,</q> or
<q>the White Bitch has bitten him.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> In the Vosges
the Harvest-May is called the <q>Dog of the harvest.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the Harvest-May,
see above, vol. i. p. 68.</note>
About Lons-le-Saulnier, in the Jura, the
last sheaf is called the Bitch. In the neighbourhood
of Verdun the regular expression for finishing the
reaping is, <q>They are going to kill the Dog;</q> and
at Épinal they say, according to the crop, <q>We will
kill the Wheat-dog, or the Rye-dog, or the Potato-dog.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 105.</note>
In Lorraine it is said of the man who cuts the
last corn, <q>He is killing the Dog of the harvest.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 30.</note>
At Dux, in the Tyrol, the man who gives the last
stroke at threshing is said to <q>strike down the Dog;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> pp. 30, 105.</note>
and at Ahnebergen, near Stade, he is called, according
to the crop, Corn-pug, Rye-pug, Wheat-pug.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
So with the wolf. In Germany it is said that <q>The
Wolf sits in the last sheaf.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 320; <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf</hi>, p. 24.</note> In some places they call
out to the reaper, <q>Beware of the Wolf;</q> or they say,
<q>He is chasing the Wolf out of the corn.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf</hi>, p. 24.</note> The last
bunch of standing corn is called the Wolf, and the
man who cuts it <q>has the Wolf.</q> The last sheaf is
also called the Wolf; and of the woman who binds
it they say, <q>The Wolf is biting her,</q> <q>she has the
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
Wolf,</q> <q>she must fetch the Wolf</q> (out of the corn).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf</hi>, p. 24.</note>
Moreover, she is herself called Wolf and has to bear
the name for a whole year; sometimes, according to
the crop, she is called the Rye-wolf or the Potato-wolf.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 25.</note>
In the island of Rügen they call out to the
woman who binds the last sheaf, <q>You're Wolf;</q> and
when she comes home she bites the lady of the house
and the stewardess, for which she receives a large
piece of meat. The same woman may be Rye-wolf,
Wheat-wolf, and Oats-wolf, if she happens to bind the
last sheaf of rye, wheat, and oats.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 28; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 320.</note> At Buir, in the
district of Cologne, it was formerly the custom to
give to the last sheaf the shape of a wolf. It was
kept in the barn till all the corn was threshed. Then
it was brought to the farmer, and he had to sprinkle
it with beer or brandy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf</hi>, p. 25.</note> In many places the sheaf
called the Wolf is made up in human form and dressed
in clothes. This indicates a confusion between the
conceptions of the corn-spirit as theriomorphic (in
animal form) and as anthropomorphic (in human
form).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 26.</note> Generally the Wolf is brought home
on the last waggon, with joyful cries.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 26; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 320.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the Wolf is supposed to hide himself
amongst the cut corn in the granary, until he is
driven out of the last bundle by the strokes of the
flail. Hence at Wanzleben, near Magdeburg, after
the threshing the peasants go in procession, leading
by a chain a man, who is enveloped in the threshed out
straw and is called the Wolf.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 321.</note> He represents the
corn-spirit who has been caught escaping from the
threshed corn. In Trier it is believed that the Corn-wolf
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
is killed at threshing. The men thresh the last
sheaf till it is reduced to chopped straw. In this way
they think that the Corn-wolf who was lurking in the
last sheaf, has been certainly killed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In France also the Corn-wolf appears at harvest.
Thus they call out to the reaper of the last corn,
<q>You will catch the Wolf.</q> Near Chambéry they form
a ring round the last standing corn, and cry, <q>The
Wolf is in there.</q> In Finisterre, when the reaping
draws near an end, the harvesters cry, <q>There is
the Wolf; we will catch him.</q> Each takes a swath
to reap, and he who finishes first calls out, <q>I've
caught the Wolf.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 320.</note> In Guyenne, when the last corn
has been reaped, they lead a wether all round the
field. It is called <q>the Wolf of the field.</q> Its horns
are decked with a wreath of flowers and corn-ears,
and its neck and body are also encircled with garlands
and ribbons. All the reapers march, singing,
behind it. Then it is killed on the field. In this
part of France the last sheaf is called the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>coujoulage</foreign>,
which, in the patois, means a wether. Hence the
killing of the wether represents the death of the corn-spirit,
considered as present in the last sheaf; but
two different conceptions of the corn-spirit&mdash;as a wolf
and as a wether&mdash;are mixed up together.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes it appears to be thought that the Wolf,
caught in the last corn, lives during the winter in the
farmhouse, ready to renew his activity as corn-spirit in
the spring. Hence at midwinter, when the lengthening
days begin to herald the approach of spring, the Wolf
makes his appearance once more. In Poland a man,
with a wolf's skin thrown over his head, is led about
at Christmas; or a stuffed wolf is carried about by
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
persons who collect money.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 322.</note> There are facts which
point to an old custom of leading about a man
enveloped in leaves and called the Wolf, while his
conductors collected money.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 323.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another form which the corn-spirit often assumes
is that of a cock. In Austria children are warned
against straying in the corn-fields, because the Corn-cock
sits there, and will peck their eyes out.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 13.</note> In
North Germany they say that <q>the Cock sits in
the last sheaf;</q> and at cutting the last corn the
reapers cry, <q>Now we will chase out the Cock.</q>
When it is cut they say, <q>We have caught the Cock.</q>
Then a cock is made of flowers, fastened on a pole,
and carried home by the reapers, singing as they go.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>; Schmitz, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Sagen des
Eifler Volkes</hi>, i. p. 95; Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Westfälische
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>, ii. p.
181; Kuhn und Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>, p.
398.</note>
At Braller, in Transylvania, when the reapers come to
the last patch of corn, they cry, <q>Here we shall catch
the Cock.</q><note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi>, p. 21.</note> At Fürstenwalde, when the last sheaf is
about to be bound, the master lets loose a cock, which
he has brought in a basket, and lets it run over the
field. All the harvesters chase it till they catch it.
Elsewhere the harvesters all try to seize the last
corn cut; he who succeeds in grasping it must crow,
and is called Cock.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 13. Cp.
Kuhn and Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> The last sheaf is called Cock,
Cock-sheaf, Harvest-cock, Harvest-hen, Autumn-hen.
A distinction is made between a Wheat-cock, Bean-cock,
etc., according to the crop.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 13.</note> At Wünschensuhl,
in Thüringen, the last sheaf is made into the shape of
a cock, and called Harvest-cock.<note place='foot'>Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 220.</note> A figure of a cock,
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
made of wood, pasteboard, or ears of corn, is borne in
front of the harvest-waggon, especially in Westphalia,
where the cock carries in his beak fruits of the earth
of all kinds. Sometimes the image of the cock is
fastened to the top of a May-tree on the last harvest-waggon.
Elsewhere a live cock, or a figure of one, is
attached to a harvest-crown and carried on a pole. In
Galicia and elsewhere this live cock is fastened to the
garland of corn-ears or flowers, which the leader of the
women-reapers carries on her head as she marches in
front of the harvest procession.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Kuhn, Westfälische Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche</hi>, ii. p. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Pfannenschmid,
<hi rend='italic'>Germanische Erntefeste</hi>, p. 110.</note> In Silesia a live
cock is presented to the master on a plate. The
harvest supper is called Harvest-cock, Stubble-cock,
etc., and a chief dish at it, at least in some places, is a
cock.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 14; Pfannenschmid,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 111, 419 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> If a waggoner upsets a harvest-waggon, it is
said that <q>he has spilt the Harvest-cock,</q> and he loses
the cock&mdash;that is, the harvest supper.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 15. So in
Shropshire, where the corn-spirit is
conceived in the form of a gander (see
above, vol. i. p. 407), the expression for
overthrowing a load at harvest is <q>to
lose the goose,</q> and the penalty used
to be the loss of the goose at the harvest
supper (Burne and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire
Folk-lore</hi>, p. 375); and in some parts
of England the harvest supper was
called the Harvest Gosling, or the
Inning Goose (Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
ii. 23, 26, Bohn's ed.)</note> The harvest-waggon,
with the figure of the cock on it, is driven
round the farmhouse before it is taken to the barn.
Then the cock is nailed over, or at the side of the
house door, or on the gable, and remains there till
next harvest.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 14.</note> In East Friesland the person who
gives the last stroke at threshing is called the
Clucking-hen, and grain is strewed before him as if
he were a hen.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the corn-spirit is killed in the form of
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
a cock. In parts of Germany, Hungary, Poland,
and Picardy, the reapers place a live cock in the
corn which is to be cut last, and chase it over the
field, or bury it up to the neck in the ground; afterwards
they strike off its head with a sickle or
scythe.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 30.</note> In many parts of Westphalia, when the
harvesters bring the wooden cock to the farmer, he
gives them a live cock, which they kill with whips
or sticks, or behead with an old sword, or throw it
into the barn to the girls, or give it to the mistress
to cook. If the Harvest-cock has not been spilt&mdash;that
is, if no waggon has been upset&mdash;the harvesters
have the right of killing the farmyard cock by
throwing stones at it or beheading it. Where this
custom has fallen into disuse, it is still common
for the farmer's wife to make cockie-leekie for
the harvesters, and to show them the head of
the cock which has been killed for the soup.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 15.</note> In
the neighbourhood of Klausenburg, Transylvania, a
cock is buried on the harvest-field in the earth, so
that only its head appears. A young man then takes
a scythe and cuts off the cock's head at a single
stroke. If he fails to do this, he is called the Red
Cock for a whole year, and people fear that next
year's crop will be bad.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the neighbourhood of
Udvarhely, Transylvania, a live cock is bound up
in the last sheaf and killed with a spit. It is
then skinned. The flesh is thrown away, but the
skin and feathers are kept till next year; and in
spring the grain from the last sheaf is mixed with
the feathers of the cock and scattered on the field
which is to be tilled.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 15; <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 30.</note> Nothing could set in a clearer
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
light the identification of the cock with the spirit of
the corn. By being tied up in the last sheaf and
killed, the cock is identified with the corn, and its
death with the cutting of the corn. By keeping its
feathers till spring, then mixing them with the seed-corn
taken from the very sheaf in which the bird had
been bound, and scattering the feathers together with
the seed over the field, the identity of the bird with
the corn is again emphasised, and its quickening and
fertilising power, as the corn-spirit, is intimated in the
plainest manner. Thus the corn-spirit, in the form of
a cock, is killed at harvest, but rises to fresh life and
activity in spring. Again, the equivalence of the cock
to the corn is expressed, hardly less plainly, in the
custom of burying the bird in the ground, and cutting
off its head (like the ears of corn) with the scythe.
</p>

<p>
Another common embodiment of the corn-spirit is
the hare.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 1.</note> In some parts of Ayrshire the cutting of
the last corn is called <q>cutting the Hare;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. 47.</note> and in
Germany a name for the last sheaf is the Hare.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 3.</note> In
East Prussia they say that the Hare sits in the last
patch of standing corn, and must be chased out by the
last reaper. The reapers hurry with their work, each
being anxious not to have <q>to chase out the Hare;</q>
for the man who does so, that is, who cuts the last
corn, is much laughed at.<note place='foot'>Lemke, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</hi>,
i. 24.</note> At Birk in Transylvania,
when the reapers come to the last patch, they cry out,
<q>We have the Hare.</q><note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi>, p. 21.</note> At Aurich, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 408.</note>
an expression for cutting the last corn is <q>to cut
off the Hare's tail.</q> <q>He is killing the Hare</q> is
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
commonly said of the man who cuts the last corn
in Germany, Sweden, Holland, France, and Italy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 29.</note>
In Norway the man who is thus said to <q>kill the
Hare</q> must give <q>hare's blood,</q> in the form of brandy,
to his fellows to drink.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the corn-spirit sometimes takes the form of
a cat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> pp. 172-174; <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 30.</note> Near Kiel children are warned not to go into
the corn-fields because <q>the Cat sits there.</q> In the
Eisenach Oberland they are told <q>the Corn-cat will
come and fetch you,</q> <q>the Corn-cat goes in the corn.</q>
In some parts of Silesia at mowing the last corn they
say, <q>the Cat is caught;</q> and at threshing, the man
who gives the last stroke is called the Cat. In the
neighbourhood of Lyons the last sheaf and the harvest
supper are both called the Cat. About Vesoul when
they cut the last corn they say, <q>We have the Cat
by the tail.</q> At Briançon, in Dauphiné, at the
beginning of reaping, a cat is decked out with ribbons,
flowers, and ears of corn. It is called the Cat of
the ball-skin (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>le chat de peau de balle</foreign>). If a reaper
is wounded at his work, they make the cat lick the
wound. At the close of the reaping the cat is again
decked out with ribbons and ears of corn; then there
is dancing and merriment. When the dance is over,
the cat is solemnly stripped of its ornaments by the
girls. At Grüneberg in Silesia the reaper who cuts
the last corn is called the Tom-cat. He is enveloped
in rye-stalks and green withes, and is furnished with
a long plaited tail. Sometimes as a companion he has
a man similarly dressed, who is called the (female) Cat.
Their duty is to run after people whom they see
and beat them with a long stick. Near Amiens the
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
expression for finishing the harvest is, <q>They are
going to kill the Cat;</q> and when the last corn is
cut a cat is killed in the farmyard. At threshing,
in some parts of France, a live cat is placed under the
last bundle of corn to be threshed, and is struck dead
with the flails. Then on Sunday it is roasted and
eaten as a holiday dish.
</p>

<p>
Further, the corn-spirit often appears in the form of
a goat. In the province of Prussia, when the corn
bends before the wind, they say, <q>The Goats are
chasing each other,</q> <q>the wind is driving the Goats
through the corn,</q> <q>the Goats are browsing there,</q> and
they expect a very good harvest. Again they say,
<q>the Oats-goat is sitting in the oats-field,</q> <q>the Corn-goat
is sitting in the rye-field.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p.
155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Children are warned
not to go into the corn-fields to pluck the blue cornflowers,
or amongst the beans to pluck pods, because
the Rye-goat, the Corn-goat, the Oats-goat, or the
Bean-goat is sitting or lying there, and will carry them
away or kill them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a harvester is taken sick or
lags behind his fellows at their work, they call out, <q>The
Harvest-goat has pushed him,</q> <q>he has been pushed
by the Corn-goat.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 159.</note> In the neighbourhood of Braunsberg
(East Prussia) at binding the oats every harvester
makes haste <q>lest the Corn-goat push him.</q> At
Oefoten in Norway each harvester has his allotted
patch to reap. When a harvester in the middle has
not finished reaping his piece after his neighbours have
finished theirs, they say of him, <q>He remains on the
island.</q> And if the laggard is a man, they imitate the
cry with which they call a he-goat; if a woman, the
cry with which they call a she-goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Near Straubing
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
in Lower Bavaria, it is said of the man who cuts
the last corn that <q>he has the Corn-goat or the
Wheat-goat, or the Oats-goat,</q> according to the crop.
Moreover, two horns are set up on the last heap of
corn, and it is called <q>the horned Goat.</q> At Kreutzburg,
East Prussia, they call out to the woman who is
binding the last sheaf, <q>The Goat is sitting in the
sheaf.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 162.</note> At Gablingen in Swabia, when the last field
of oats upon a farm is being reaped, the reapers carve
a goat out of wood. Ears of oats are inserted in its
nostrils and mouth, and it is adorned with garlands
of flowers. It is set upon the field and called the
Oats-goat. When the reaping approaches an end,
each reaper hastens to finish his piece first; he who
is the last to finish gets the Oats-goat.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> No. 426;
<hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 162.</note> Again, the
last sheaf is itself called the Goat. Thus, in the valley
of the Wiesent, Bavaria, the last sheaf bound on the
field is called the Goat, and they have a proverb, <q>The
field must bear a goat.</q><note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> No.
422; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 163.</note> At Spachbrücken in Hesse,
the last handful of corn which is cut is called the Goat,
and the man who cuts it is much ridiculed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 163.</note> Sometimes
the last sheaf is made up in the form of a goat,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 164.</note>
and they say, <q>The Goat is sitting in it.</q> Again,
the person who cuts or binds the last sheaf is called
the Goat. Thus, in parts of Mecklenburg they call
out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <q>You
are the Harvest-goat.</q> In the neighbourhood of Uelzen
in Hanover, the harvest festival begins with <q>the
bringing of the Harvest-goat;</q> that is, the woman
who bound the last sheaf is wrapt in straw, crowned
with a harvest-wreath, and brought in a wheelbarrow
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
to the village, where a round dance takes place.
About Lüneburg, also, the woman who binds the last
corn is decked with a crown of corn-ears and is called
the Corn-goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 164.</note> In the Canton St. Gall, Switzerland,
the person who cuts the last handful of corn on
the field, or drives the last harvest-waggon to the barn,
is called the Corn-goat or the Rye-goat, or simply the
Goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Canton Thurgau he is called Corn-goat;
like a goat he has a bell hung round his neck, is
led in triumph, and drenched with liquor. In parts of
Styria, also, the man who cuts the last corn is called
Corn-goat, Oats-goat, etc. As a rule, the man who
thus gets the name of Corn-goat has to bear it a whole
year till the next harvest.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 165.</note>
</p>

<p>
According to one view, the corn-spirit, who has
been caught in the form of a goat or otherwise, lives
in the farmhouse or barn over winter. Thus, each
farm has its own embodiment of the corn-spirit. But,
according to another view, the corn-spirit is the genius
or deity, not of the corn of one farm only, but of all
the corn. Hence when the corn on one farm is all cut,
he flees to another where there is still corn left standing.
This idea is brought out in a harvest-custom
which was formerly observed in Skye. The farmer
who first finished reaping sent a man or woman with a
sheaf to a neighbouring farmer who had not finished;
the latter in his turn, when he had finished, sent on the
sheaf to his neighbour who was still reaping; and so
the sheaf made the round of the farms till all the corn
was cut. The sheaf was called the <foreign rend='italic'>goabbir bhacagh</foreign>,
that is, the Cripple Goat.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 24, Bohn's ed.; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 165.</note> The corn-spirit was probably
thus represented as lame because he had been
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
crippled by the cutting of the corn. We have seen
that sometimes the old woman who brings home the
last sheaf must limp on one foot.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 380.</note> In the Böhmer
Wald mountains, between Bohemia and Bavaria, when
two peasants are driving home their corn together,
they race against each other to see who shall get
home first. The village boys mark the loser in the
race, and at night they come and erect on the roof of
his house the Oats-goat, which is a colossal figure of a
goat made of straw.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 165.</note>
</p>

<p>
But sometimes the corn-spirit, in the form of a
goat, is believed to be slain on the harvest-field by
the sickle or scythe. Thus, in the neighbourhood of
Bernkastel, on the Moselle, the reapers determine by
lot the order in which they shall follow each other.
The first is called the fore-reaper, the last the tail-bearer.
If a reaper overtakes the man in front he
reaps past him, bending round so as to leave the
slower reaper in a patch by himself. This patch is
called the Goat; and the man for whom <q>the Goat
is cut</q> in this way, is laughed and jeered at by
his fellows for the rest of the day. When the tail-bearer
cuts the last ears of corn, it is said <q>He is
cutting the Goat's neck off.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 166; <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 185.</note> In the neighbourhood
of Grenoble, before the end of the reaping, a live goat
is adorned with flowers and ribbons and allowed to run
about the field. The reapers chase it and try to catch
it. When it is caught, the farmer's wife holds it fast
while the farmer cuts off its head. The goat's flesh
serves to furnish the harvest supper. A piece of the
flesh is pickled and kept till the next harvest, when
another goat is killed. Then all the harvesters eat
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
of the flesh. On the same day the skin of the goat is
made into a cloak, which the farmer, who works with
his men, must always wear at harvest-time if rain or
bad weather sets in. But if a reaper gets pains in his
back, the farmer gives him the goat-skin to wear.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 166.</note>
The reason for this seems to be that the pains in
the back, being inflicted by the corn-spirit, can also be
healed by it. Similarly we saw that elsewhere, when
a reaper is wounded at reaping, a cat, as the representative
of the corn-spirit, is made to lick the wound.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>.</note>
Esthonian reapers in the island of Mon think that the
man who cuts the first ears of corn at harvest will get
pains in his back,<note place='foot'>Holzmayer, <hi rend='italic'>Osiliana</hi>, p. 107.</note>&mdash;probably because the corn-spirit is
believed to resent especially the first wound; and, in
order to escape pains in the back, Saxon reapers in
Transylvania gird their loins with the first handful
of ears which they cut.<note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
u. Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</hi>,
p. 19. Cp. B. K. p. 482 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Here, again, the corn-spirit
is applied to for healing or protection, but in his
original vegetable form, not in the form of a goat
or a cat.
</p>

<p>
Further, the corn-spirit under the form of a goat is
sometimes conceived as lurking among the cut corn in
the barn, till he is driven from it by the threshing-flail.
For example, in the neighbourhood of Marktl in
Upper Bavaria the sheaves are called Straw-goats or
simply Goats. They are laid in a great heap on the
open field and threshed by two rows of men standing
opposite each other, who, as they ply their flails, sing a
song in which they say that they see the Straw-goat
amongst the corn-stalks. The last Goat, that is, the
last sheaf, is adorned with a wreath of violets and other
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
flowers and with cakes strung together. It is placed
right in the middle of the heap. Some of the threshers
rush at it and tear the best of it out; others lay on
with their flails so recklessly that heads are sometimes
broken. In threshing this last sheaf, each man casts
up to the man opposite him the misdeeds of which he
has been guilty throughout the year.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 225 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> No. 421;
<hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Oberinntal in
Tyrol the last thresher is called Goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 168.</note> At Tettnang
in Würtemberg the thresher who gives the last stroke
to the last bundle of corn before it is turned goes by the
name of the He-goat, and it is said <q>he has driven the
He-goat away.</q> The person who, after the bundle
has been turned, gives the last stroke of all, is called
the She-goat.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 445,
No. 162; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 168.</note> In this custom it is implied that the
corn is inhabited by a pair of corn-spirits, male and
female. Further, the corn-spirit, captured in the form
of a goat at threshing, is passed on to a neighbour
whose threshing is not yet finished. In Franche Comté,
as soon as the threshing is over, the young people set
up a straw figure of a goat on the farmyard of a
neighbour who is still threshing. He must give them
wine or money in return. At Ellwangen in Würtemberg
the effigy of a goat is made out of the last bundle
of corn at threshing; four sticks form its legs, and two
its horns. The man who gives the last stroke with the
flail must carry the Goat to the barn of a neighbour
who is still threshing and throw it down on the floor;
if he is caught in the act, they tie the Goat on his back.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 169.</note>
A similar custom is observed at Indersdorf in Upper
Bavaria; the man who throws the straw Goat into the
neighbour's barn imitates the bleating of a goat; if they
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
catch him they blacken his face and tie the Goat on his
back.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 224 sq. No.
420; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 169.</note> At Zabern in Elsass, when a farmer is a week
or more behind his neighbours with his threshing,
they set a real stuffed goat (or fox) before his door.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 169.</note>
Sometimes the spirit of the corn in goat form is
believed to be killed at threshing. In the district of
Traunstein, Upper Bavaria, it is thought that the Oats-goat
is in the last sheaf of oats. He is represented by
an old rake set up on end, with an old pot for a head.
The children are then told to kill the Oats-goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 170.</note> A
stranger passing a harvest-field is sometimes taken
for the Corn-goat escaping in human shape from the
cut or threshed grain. Thus, when a stranger passes
a harvest-field, all the labourers stop and shout as with
one voice <q>He-goat! He-goat!</q> At rape-seed threshing
in Schleswig, which generally takes place on the
field, the same cry is raised if the stranger does not
take off his hat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 170.</note>
</p>

<p>
At sowing their winter corn the Prussian Slavs
used to kill a goat, consume its flesh with many
superstitious ceremonies, and hang the skin on a high
pole near an oak and a large stone. Here it remained
till harvest. Then, after a prayer had been offered by
a peasant who acted as priest (<foreign rend='italic'>Weidulut</foreign>) the young
folk joined hands and danced round the oak and the
pole. Afterwards they scrambled for the bunch of corn,
and the priest distributed the herbs with a sparing
hand. Then he placed the goat-skin on the large
stone, sat down on it and preached to the people about
the history of their forefathers and their old heathen
customs and beliefs.<note place='foot'>Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>, p. 23
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 394 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The goat-skin thus suspended
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
on the field from sowing time to harvest represents the
corn-spirit superintending the growth of the corn.
</p>

<p>
Another form which the corn-spirit often assumes is
that of a bull, cow, or ox. When the wind sweeps
over the corn they say at Conitz in West Prussia, <q>The
Steer is running in the corn;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 58.</note> when the corn is thick
and strong in one spot, they say in some parts of East
Prussia, <q>The Bull is lying in the corn.</q> When a harvester
has overstrained and lamed himself, they say in
the Graudenz district (West Prussia), <q>The Bull pushed
him;</q> in Lothringen they say, <q>He has the Bull.</q> The
meaning of both expressions is that he has unwittingly
lighted upon the divine corn-spirit, who has punished
the profane intruder with lameness.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> So near Chambéry
when a reaper wounds himself with his sickle, it
is said that he has <q>the wound of the Ox.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 62.</note> In the district
of Bunzlau the last sheaf is sometimes made into
the shape of a horned ox, stuffed with tow and wrapt in
corn-ears. This figure is called the Old Man (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>der Alte</foreign>).
In some parts of Bohemia the last sheaf is made up in
human form and called the Buffalo-bull.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 59.</note> These cases
show a confusion between the anthropomorphic and
the theriomorphic conception of the corn-spirit. The
confusion is parallel to that of killing a wether under
the name of a wolf.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</note> In the Canton of Thurgau,
Switzerland, the last sheaf, if it is a large one, is called
the Cow.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 59.</note> All over Swabia the last bundle of corn on
the field is called the Cow; the man who cuts the last
ears <q>has the Cow,</q> and is himself called Cow or
Barley-cow or Oats-cow, according to the crop; at the
harvest supper he gets a nosegay of flowers and corn-ears
and a more liberal allowance of drink than the rest.
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
But he is teased and laughed at; so no one likes to be
the Cow.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 440
<hi rend='italic'>sq. Nos.</hi> 151, 152, 153; Panzer,
<hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii.
p. 234, No. 428; <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 59.</note> The Cow was sometimes represented by
the figure of a woman made out of ears of corn and
corn-flowers. It was carried to the farmhouse by the
man who had cut the last handful of corn. The children
ran after him and the neighbours turned out to
laugh at him, till the farmer took the Cow from him.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 233, No.
427; <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 59.</note>
Here again the confusion between the human and the
animal form of the corn-spirit is apparent. In various
parts of Switzerland the reaper who cuts the last ears
of corn is called Wheat-cow, Corn-cow, Oats-cow, or
Corn-steer, and is the butt of many a joke.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some
parts of East Prussia, when a few ears of corn
have been left standing by inadvertence on the last
swath, the foremost reaper seizes them and cries,
<q>Bull! Bull!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 58.</note> On the other hand, in the district of
Rosenheim, in Upper Bavaria, when a farmer is later
in getting in his harvest than his neighbours, they set
up on his land a Straw-bull, as it is called. This is a
gigantic figure of a bull made of stubble on a framework
of wood and adorned with flowers and leaves.
A label is attached to it containing doggerel verses in
ridicule of the man on whose land the Straw-bull is
placed.<note place='foot'>M. F. p. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the corn-spirit in the form of a bull or ox is
killed on the harvest-field at the close of the reaping.
At Pouilly near Dijon, when the last ears of corn are
about to be cut, an ox adorned with ribbons, flowers,
and ears of corn is led all round the field, followed by
the whole troop of reapers dancing. Then a man
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
disguised as the Devil cuts the last ears of corn and
immediately kills the ox. Part of the flesh of the animal
is eaten at the harvest supper; part is pickled and kept
till the first day of sowing in spring. At Pont à
Mousson and elsewhere on the evening of the last day
of reaping a calf adorned with flowers and ears of corn
is led three times round the farmyard, being allured
by a bait or driven by men with sticks, or conducted
by the farmer's wife with a rope. The calf
selected for this ceremony is the calf which was born
first on the farm in the spring of the year. It is
followed by all the reapers with their implements.
Then it is allowed to run free; the reapers chase it,
and whoever catches it is called King of the Calf.
Lastly, it is solemnly killed; at Lunéville the man
who acts as butcher is the Jewish merchant of the
village.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 60.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes again the corn-spirit hides himself
amongst the cut corn in the barn to reappear in bull
or cow form at threshing. Thus at Wurmlingen in
Thüringen the man who gives the last stroke at
threshing is called the Cow, or rather the Barley-cow,
Oats-cow, Peas-cow, etc., according to the crop. He
is entirely enveloped in straw; his head is surmounted
by sticks in imitation of horns, and two lads lead him
by ropes to the well to drink. On the way thither he
must low like a cow, and for a long time afterwards he
goes by the name of the Cow.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 444
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> No. 162; <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 61.</note> At Obermedlingen in
Swabia, when the threshing draws near an end, each
man is careful to avoid giving the last stroke. He
who does give it <q>gets the Cow,</q> which is a straw
figure dressed in an old ragged petticoat, hood, and
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
stockings. It is tied on his back with a straw-rope;
his face is blackened, he is tied with straw-ropes to a
wheelbarrow, and wheeled round the village.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 233, No. 427.</note> Here,
again, we are met with that confusion between the
anthropomorphic and theriomorphic conception of the
corn-spirit, which has been already signalised. In
Canton Schaffhausen the man who threshes the last
corn is called the Cow; in Canton Thurgau, the Corn-bull;
in Canton Zurich, the Thresher-cow. In the
last-mentioned district he is wrapt in straw and bound
to one of the trees in the orchard.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Arad in
Hungary the man who gives the last stroke at threshing
is enveloped in straw and a cow's hide with the
horns attached to it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 62.</note> At Pessnitz, in the district of
Dresden, the man who gives the last stroke with the
flail is called Bull. He must make a straw-man and
set it up before a neighbour's window.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 62.</note> Here, apparently,
as in so many cases, the corn-spirit is passed on
to a neighbour who has not finished threshing. So at
Herbrechtingen in Thüringen the effigy of a ragged
old woman is flung into the barn of the farmer who is
last with his threshing. The man who throws it in
cries, <q>There is the Cow for you.</q> If the threshers
catch him they detain him over night and punish him
by keeping him from the harvest supper.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 445 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> No.
163.</note> In these
latter customs the confusion between the anthropomorphic
and theriomorphic conception of the corn-spirit
meets us again. Further, the corn-spirit in bull
form is sometimes believed to be killed at threshing.
At Auxerre in threshing the last bundle of corn they
call out twelve times, <q>We are killing the Bull.</q> In
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
the neighbourhood of Bordeaux, where a butcher kills
an ox on the field immediately after the close of the
reaping, it is said of the man who gives the last stroke
at threshing that <q>he has killed the Bull.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 60.</note> At Chambéry
the last sheaf is called the sheaf of the Young Ox
and a race takes place to it, in which all the reapers
join. When the last stroke is given at threshing they
say that <q>the Ox is killed;</q> and immediately thereupon
a real ox is slaughtered by the reaper who cut
the last corn. The flesh of the ox is eaten by the
threshers at supper.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 62.</note>
</p>

<p>
We have seen that sometimes the young corn-spirit,
whose task it is to quicken the corn of the
coming year, is believed to be born as a Corn-baby on
the harvest-field.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 343 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in Berry the young corn-spirit
is sometimes believed to be born on the field in
calf form. For when a binder has not rope enough to
bind all the corn in sheaves, he puts aside the wheat
that remains over and imitates the lowing of a cow.
The meaning is that <q>the sheaf has given birth to a
calf.</q><note place='foot'>Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et
Légendes du Centre de la France</hi>, ii.
135.</note> In Puy-de-Dôme when a binder cannot keep
up with the reaper whom he or she follows, they
say <q>He or she is giving birth to the Calf.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 62, <q><hi rend='italic'>Il fait le veau</hi>.</q></note> In
some parts of Prussia, in similar circumstances,
they call out to the woman, <q>The Bull is coming,</q>
and imitate the bellowing of a bull.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 62.</note> In these
cases the woman is conceived as the Corn-cow or
old corn-spirit, while the supposed calf is the Corn-calf
or young corn-spirit. In some parts of Austria a
mythical calf (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Muhkälbchen</foreign>) is believed to be seen
amongst the sprouting corn in spring and to push the
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
children; when the corn waves in the wind they say,
<q>The Calf is going about.</q> Clearly, as Mannhardt
observes, this calf of the spring-time is the same animal
which is afterwards believed to be killed at reaping.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 63.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the corn-spirit appears in the shape of
a horse or mare. Between Kalw and Stuttgart, when
the corn bends before the wind, they say, <q>There runs
the Horse.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 167.</note> In Hertfordshire, at the end of the
reaping, there is or was a ceremony called <q>crying
the Mare.</q> The last blades of corn left standing on
the field are tied together and called the Mare. The
reapers stand at a distance and throw their sickles at
it; he who cuts it through <q>has the prize, with
acclamations and good cheer.</q> After it is cut the
reapers cry thrice with a loud voice, <q>I have her!</q>
Others answer thrice, <q>What have you?</q>&mdash;<q>A Mare!
a Mare! a Mare!</q>&mdash;<q>Whose is she?</q> is next asked
thrice. <q>A. B.'s,</q> naming the owner thrice. <q>Whither
will you send her?</q>&mdash;<q>To C. D.,</q> naming some neighbour
who has not all his corn reaped.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 24,
Bohn's ed.</note> In this custom
the corn-spirit in the form of a mare is passed on from
a farm where the corn is all cut to another farm where
it is still standing, and where therefore the corn-spirit
may be supposed naturally to take refuge. In Shropshire
the custom is similar. <q rend='pre'>Crying, calling, or
shouting the mare is a ceremony performed by the
men of that farm which is the first in any parish or
district to finish the harvest. The object of it is to
make known their own prowess, and to taunt the
laggards by a pretended offer of the <q>owd mar</q> [old
mare] to help out their <q>chem</q> [team]. All the men
assemble (the wooden harvest-bottle being of course
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
one of the company) in the stackyard, or, better, on
the highest ground on the farm, and there shout the
following dialogue, preceding it by a grand <q>Hip, hip,
hip, hurrah!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I 'ave 'er, I 'ave 'er, I 'ave 'er!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Whad 'ast thee, whad 'ast thee, whad 'ast thee?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>A mar'! a mar'! a mar'!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Whose is 'er, whose is 'er, whose is 'er?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Maister A.'s, Maister A.'s, Maister A.'s!</q></q>
(naming the farmer whose harvest is finished).
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>W'eer sha't the' send 'er? w'eer sha't the' send
'er? w'eer sha't the' send 'er?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>To Maister B.'s, to Maister B.'s, to Maister
B.'s</q> (naming one whose harvest is <emph>not</emph> finished).</q>
</p>

<p>
The farmer who finishes his harvest last, and who
therefore cannot send the Mare to any one else, is
said <q>to keep her all winter.</q> The mocking offer
of the Mare was sometimes responded to by a
mocking acceptance of her help. Thus an old man
told an inquirer, <q>While we wun at supper, a mon
cumm'd wi' a autar [halter] to fatch her away.</q>
But at one place (Longnor, near Leebotwood), down
to about 1850, the Mare used really to be sent.
<q>The head man of the farmer who had finished
harvest first was mounted on the best horse of the
team&mdash;the leader&mdash;both horse and man being adorned
with ribbons, streamers, etc. Thus arrayed, a boy
on foot led the pair in triumph to the neighbouring
farmhouses. Sometimes the man who took the
<q>mare</q> received, as well as plenty of harvest-ale,
some rather rough, though good-humoured, treatment,
coming back minus his decorations, and so on.</q><note place='foot'>Burne and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi>, p. 373 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
the neighbourhood of Lille the idea of the corn-spirit
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
in horse form is clearly preserved. When a harvester
grows weary at his work, it is said, <q>He has the
fatigue of the Horse.</q> The first sheaf, called the
<q>Cross of the Horse,</q> is placed on a cross of box-wood
in the barn, and the youngest horse on the
farm must tread on it. The reapers dance round
the last blades of corn, crying, <q>See the remains
of the Horse.</q> The sheaf made out of these last
blades is given to the youngest horse of the parish
(commune) to eat. This youngest horse of the parish
clearly represents, as Mannhardt says, the corn-spirit
of the following year, the Corn-foal, which absorbs the
spirit of the old Corn-horse by eating the last corn
cut; for, as usual, the old corn-spirit takes his final
refuge in the last sheaf. The thresher of the last
sheaf is said to <q>beat the Horse.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 167.</note> Again, a trace
of the horse-shaped corn-spirit is reported from Berry.
The harvesters there are accustomed to take a noon-day
sleep in the field. This is called <q>seeing the
Horse.</q> The leader or <q>King</q> of the harvesters
gives the signal for going to sleep. If he delays
giving the signal, one of the harvesters will begin
to neigh like a horse, the rest imitate him, and then
they all go <q>to see the Horse.</q><note place='foot'>Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et
Légendes du Centre de la France</hi>, ii. 133;
<hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The last animal embodiment of the corn-spirit
which we shall notice is the pig (boar or sow). In
Thüringen, when the wind sets the young corn in
motion, they sometimes say, <q>The Boar is rushing
through the corn.</q><note place='foot'>Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 213, No.
4.</note> Amongst the Esthonians of the
island of Oesel the last sheaf is called the Rye-boar,
and the man who gets it is saluted with a cry of,
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
<q>You have the Rye-boar on your back!</q> In reply
he strikes up a song, in which he prays for plenty.<note place='foot'>Holzmayer, <hi rend='italic'>Osiliana</hi>, p. 107; <hi rend='italic'>M.
F.</hi> p. 187.</note>
At Kohlerwinkel, near Augsburg, at the close of the
harvest, the last bunch of standing corn is cut down,
stalk by stalk, by all the reapers in turn. He who
cuts the last stalk <q>gets the Sow,</q> and is laughed at.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Aus Schwaben</hi>, ii. 328.</note>
In other Swabian villages also the man who cuts the
last corn <q>has the Sow,</q> or <q>has the Rye-sow.</q><note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. pp. 223, 224, Nos. 417,
419.</note> In
the Traunstein district, Upper Bavaria, the man who
cuts the last handful of rye or wheat <q>has the Sow,</q>
and is called Sow-driver.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 112.</note> At Friedingen, in Swabia,
the thresher who gives the last stroke is called Sow&mdash;Barley-sow,
Corn-sow, etc., according to the crop.
At Onstmettingen the man who gives the last stroke
at threshing <q>has the Sow;</q> he is often bound up
in a sheaf and dragged by a rope along the ground.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 445,
No. 162.</note>
And, generally, in Swabia the man who gives the last
stroke with the flail is called Sow. He may, however,
rid himself of this invidious distinction by passing on
to a neighbour the straw-rope, which is the badge of
his position as Sow. So he goes to a house and
throws the straw-rope into it, crying, <q>There, I
bring you the Sow.</q> All the inmates give chase;
and if they catch him they beat him, shut him up for
several hours in the pig-sty, and oblige him to take
the <q>Sow</q> away again.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. 425, No. 379.</note> In various parts of Upper
Bavaria the man who gives the last stroke at threshing
must <q>carry the Pig</q>&mdash;that is, either a straw effigy of
a pig or merely a bundle of straw-ropes. This he
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
carries to a neighbouring farm where the threshing
is not finished, and throws it into the barn. If the
threshers catch him they handle him roughly, beating
him, blackening or dirtying his face, throwing him into
filth, binding the Sow on his back, etc.; if the bearer
of the Sow is a woman they cut off her hair. At the
harvest supper or dinner the man who <q>carried the
Pig</q> gets one or more dumplings made in the form of
pigs; sometimes he gets a large dumpling and a number
of small ones, all in pig form, the large one being
called the sow and the small ones the sucking-pigs.
Sometimes he has the right to be the first to put
his hand into the dish and take out as many small
dumplings (<q>sucking-pigs</q>) as he can, while the other
threshers strike at his hand with spoons or sticks.
When the dumplings are served up by the maid-servant,
all the people at table cry, <q>Süz, süz, süz!</q>
being the cry used in calling pigs. Sometimes after
dinner the man who <q>carried the Pig</q> has his face
blackened, and is set on a cart and drawn round the
village by his fellows, followed by a crowd crying,
<q>Süz, süz, süz!</q> as if they were calling swine.
Sometimes, after being wheeled round the village,
he is flung on the dunghill.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii. pp. 221-224, Nos. 409, 410,
411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 418.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the corn-spirit in the form of a pig plays his
part at sowing-time as well as at harvest. At Neuautz,
in Courland, when barley is sown for the first time in
the year, the farmer's wife boils the chine of a pig along
with the tail, and brings it to the sower on the field.
He eats of it, but cuts off the tail and sticks it in the
field; it is believed that the ears of corn will then grow
as long as the tail.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the pig is the corn-spirit,
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
whose fertilising power is sometimes supposed to
lie especially in his tail.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</note> As a pig he is put in the
ground at sowing-time, and as a pig he reappears
amongst the ripe corn at harvest. For amongst
the neighbouring Esthonians, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> the
last sheaf is called the Rye-boar. Somewhat similar
customs are observed in Germany. In the Salza
district, near Meiningen, a certain bone in the pig
is called <q>the Jew on the winnowing-fan</q> (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>der Jud'
auf der Wanne</foreign>). The flesh of this bone is boiled
on Shrove Tuesday, but the bone is put amongst
the ashes, which the neighbours exchange as presents
on St. Peter's Day (22d February), and then mix
with the seed-corn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 187.</note> In the whole of Hessen,
Meiningen, etc., people eat pea-soup with dried
pig-ribs on Ash Wednesday or Candlemas. The
ribs are then collected and hung in the room till
sowing-time, when they are inserted in the sown
field or in the seed-bag amongst the flax seed. This
is thought to be an infallible specific against earth-fleas
and moles, and to cause the flax to grow well
and tall.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen,
Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>,
pp. 189, 218; W. Kolbe, <hi rend='italic'>Hessische
Volks-Sitten und Gebräuche</hi> (Marburg,
1888), p. 35.</note> In many parts of White Russia people
eat a roast lamb or sucking-pig at Easter, and then
throw the bones backwards upon the fields, to preserve
the corn from hail.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 188; Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of
the Russian People</hi>, p. 220.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the conception of the corn-spirit as embodied
in pig form is nowhere more clearly expressed than in
the Scandinavian custom of the Yule Boar. In Sweden
and Denmark at Yule (Christmas) it is the custom to
bake a loaf in the form of a boar-pig. This is called
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
the Yule Boar. The corn of the last sheaf is often used
to make it. All through Yule the Yule Boar stands on
the table. Often it is kept till the sowing-time in spring,
when part of it is mixed with the seed-corn and part
given to the ploughmen and plough-horses or plough-oxen
to eat, in the expectation of a good harvest.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 491;
Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Scottish
Language</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Maiden</q>; Afzelius,
<hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen und Volkslieder aus Schwedens
älterer und neuerer Zeit</hi>, übersetzt
von Ungewitter, i. 9.</note> In
this custom the corn-spirit, immanent in the last sheaf,
appears at midwinter in the form of a boar made from
the corn of the last sheaf; and his quickening influence
on the corn is shown by mixing part of the Yule Boar
with the seed-corn, and giving part of it to the ploughman
and his cattle to eat. Similarly we saw that the
Corn-wolf makes his appearance at midwinter, the
time when the year begins to verge towards spring.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
We may conjecture that the Yule straw, of which
Swedish peasants make various superstitious uses,
comes, in part at least, from the sheaf out of which
the Yule Boar is made. The Yule straw is long
rye-straw, a portion of which is always set apart
for this season. It is strewn over the floor at
Christmas, and the peasants attribute many virtues
to it. For example, they think that some of it
scattered on the ground will make a barren field
productive. Again, the peasant at Christmas seats
himself on a log; his eldest son or daughter, or the
mother herself, if the children are not old enough,
places a wisp of the Yule straw on his knee. From
this he draws out single straws, and throws them,
one by one, up to the ceiling; and as many as lodge
in the rafters, so many will be the sheaves of rye he
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
will have to thresh at harvest.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>,
pp. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 182. On Christmas night
children sleep on a bed of the Yule
straw (<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p. 177).</note> Again, it is only
the Yule straw which may be used in binding the
fruit-trees as a charm to fertilise them.<note place='foot'>Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Opfergebräuche</hi>, p.
215. Cp. above, vol. i. p. 60.</note> These uses
of the Yule straw show that it is believed to possess
fertilising virtues analogous to those ascribed to the
Yule Boar; the conjecture is therefore legitimate that
the Yule straw is made from the same sheaf as the
Yule Boar. Formerly a real boar was sacrificed at
Christmas,<note place='foot'>Afzelius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 31.</note> and apparently also a man in the character
of the Yule Boar. This, at least, may perhaps be inferred
from a Christmas custom still observed in
Sweden. A man is wrapt up in a skin, and carries a
wisp of straw in his mouth, so that the projecting
straws look like the bristles of a boar. A knife is
brought, and an old woman, with her face blackened,
pretends to sacrifice the man.<note place='foot'>Afzelius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 9; Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant
Life in Sweden</hi>, pp. 181, 185.</note>
</p>

<p>
So much for the animal embodiments of the corn-spirit
as they are presented to us in the folk-customs of
Northern Europe. These customs bring out clearly
the sacramental character of the harvest supper. The
corn-spirit is conceived as embodied in an animal; this
divine animal is slain, and its flesh and blood are
partaken of by the harvesters. Thus, the cock, the
goose, the hare, the cat, the goat, and the ox are eaten
sacramentally by the harvesters, and the pig is eaten
sacramentally by ploughmen in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>,
<ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>. In regard to the hare the substitution
of brandy for hare's blood
is doubtless comparatively modern.</note> Again, as
a substitute for the real flesh of the divine being, bread
or dumplings are made in his image and eaten sacramentally;
thus, pig-shaped dumplings are eaten by the
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
harvesters, and loaves made in boar-shape (the Yule
Boar) are eaten in spring by the ploughman and his
cattle.
</p>

<p>
The reader has probably remarked the complete
parallelism between the anthropomorphic and the
theriomorphic conceptions of the corn-spirit. The
parallel may be here briefly resumed. When the
corn waves in the wind it is said either that the
Corn-mother or that the Corn-wolf, etc. is passing
through the corn. Children are warned against
straying in corn-fields either because the Corn-mother
or because the Corn-wolf, etc. is there. In the last corn
cut or the last sheaf threshed either the Corn-mother
or the Corn-wolf, etc. is supposed to be present. The
last sheaf is itself called either the Corn-mother or the
Corn-wolf, etc., and is made up in the shape either of a
woman or of a wolf, etc. The person who cuts, binds,
or threshes the last sheaf is called either the Old
Woman or the Wolf, etc., according to the name
bestowed on the sheaf itself. As in some places a
sheaf made in human form and called the Maiden,
the Mother of the Maize, etc. is kept from one
harvest to the next in order to secure a continuance
of the corn-spirit's blessing; so in some places the
Harvest-cock and in others the flesh of the goat is
kept for a similar purpose from one harvest to the
next. As in some places the grain taken from the
Corn-mother is mixed with the seed-corn in spring to
make the crop abundant; so in some places the
feathers of the cock, and in Sweden the Yule Boar
is kept till spring and mixed with the seed-corn for
a like purpose. As part of the Corn-mother or
Maiden is given to the cattle to eat in order that they
may thrive, so part of the Yule Boar is given to the
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
ploughing horses or oxen in spring. Lastly, the death
of the corn-spirit is represented by killing (in reality or
pretence) either his human or his animal representative;
and the worshippers partake sacramentally either of
the actual body and blood of the representative (human
or animal) of the divinity, or of bread made in his
likeness.
</p>

<p>
Other animal forms assumed by the corn-spirit are
the stag, roe, sheep, bear, ass, fox, mouse, stork, swan,
and kite.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 1.</note> If it is asked why the corn-spirit should be
thought to appear in the form of an animal and of
so many different animals, we may reply that to
primitive man the simple appearance of an animal
or bird among the corn is probably sufficient of itself
to suggest a mysterious connection between the animal
or bird and the corn; and when we remember that in
the old days, before fields were fenced in, all kinds
of animals must have been free to roam over them, we
need not wonder that the corn-spirit should have been
identified even with large animals like the horse and
cow, which nowadays could not, except by a rare
accident, be found straying among the corn. This
explanation applies with peculiar force to the very
common case in which the animal embodiment of the
corn-spirit is believed to lurk in the last standing corn.
For at harvest a number of wild animals&mdash;hares,
rabbits, partridges, etc.&mdash;are commonly driven by the
progress of the reaping into the last patch of standing
corn, and make their escape from it as it is being cut
down. So regularly does this happen that reapers
and others often stand round the last patch of corn
armed with sticks or guns, with which they kill the
animals as they dart out of their last refuge among the
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
corn. Now, primitive man, to whom magical changes
of shape seem perfectly credible, finds it most natural
that the spirit of the corn, driven from his home
amongst the corn, should make his escape in the form
of the animal which is seen to rush out of the last
patch of corn as it falls under the scythe of the reaper.
Thus the identification of the corn-spirit with an
animal is analogous to the identification of him with
a passing stranger. As the sudden appearance of a
stranger near the harvest-field or threshing-floor is, to
the primitive mind, sufficient to identify him as the
spirit of the corn escaping from the cut or threshed
corn, so the sudden appearance of an animal issuing
from the cut corn is enough to identify it with the
corn-spirit escaping from his ruined home. The two
identifications are so analogous that they can hardly be
dissociated in any attempt to explain them. Those
who look to some other principle than the one here
suggested for the explanation of the latter identification
are bound to show that their explanation covers
the former identification also.
</p>

<p>
But however we may explain it, the fact remains
that in peasant folk-lore the corn-spirit is very commonly
conceived and represented in animal form.
May not this fact explain the relation in which certain
animals stood to the ancient deities of vegetation,
Dionysus, Demeter, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris?
</p>

<p>
To begin with Dionysus. We have seen that he
was represented sometimes as a goat and sometimes
as a bull. As a goat he can hardly be separated from
the minor divinities, the Pans, Satyrs, and Silenuses,
all of whom are closely associated with him and are
represented more or less completely in the form of
goats. Thus, Pan was regularly represented in
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
sculpture and painting with the face and legs of a
goat.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 46.</note> The Satyrs were depicted with pointed goat-ears,
and sometimes with sprouting horns and short
tails.<note place='foot'>Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i.
600; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 138.</note> They were sometimes spoken of simply as
goats;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 139.</note> and in the drama their parts were played by
men dressed in goat-skins.<note place='foot'>Pollux, iv. 118.</note> Silenus is represented in
art clad in a goat-skin.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Further, the Fauns, the
Italian counterpart of the Greek Pans and Satyrs,
are described as being half goats, with goat-feet and
goat-horns.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, ii. 361; iii. 312; v.
101; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Heroides</hi>, iv. 49.</note> Again, all these minor goat-formed
divinities partake more or less clearly of the character
of woodland deities. Thus, Pan was called by the
Arcadians the Lord of the Wood.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> i. 22, 3.</note> The Silenuses
associated with the tree-nymphs.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Aphrodite</hi>, 262
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Fauns are
expressly designated as woodland deities;<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>N. H.</hi> xii. 3; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi>
vi. 392; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 303, 309;
Gloss. Isid. Mart. Cap. ii. 167, cited
by Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 113.</note> and their
character as such is still further brought out by their
association, or even identification, with Silvanus and
the Silvanuses, who, as their name of itself indicates,
are spirits of the woods.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>N. H.</hi> xii. 3; Martianus
Capella, ii. 167; Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Civ. Dei</hi>,
xv. 23; Aurelius Victor, <hi rend='italic'>Origo gentis
Romanae</hi>, iv. 6.</note> Lastly, the association of
the Satyrs with the Silenuses, Fauns, and Silvanuses,<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Ecl.</hi> vi. 14;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> vi. 392 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Martianus
Capella, ii. 167.</note>
proves that the Satyrs also were woodland deities.
These goat-formed spirits of the woods have their
counterparts in the folk-lore of Northern Europe.
Thus, the Russian wood-spirits, called <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschie</foreign> (from
<foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>ljes</foreign>, <q>wood,</q>) are believed to appear partly in human
shape, but with the horns, ears, and legs of goats.
The <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschi</foreign> can alter his stature at pleasure; when he
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
walks in the wood he is as tall as the trees; when he
walks in the meadows he is no higher than the grass.
Some of the <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschie</foreign> are spirits of the corn as well
as of the wood; before harvest they are as tall as the
corn-stalks, but after it they shrink to the height of the
stubble.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 145.</note> This brings out&mdash;what we have remarked
before&mdash;the close connection between tree-spirits and
corn-spirits, and shows how easily the former may
melt into the latter. Similarly the Fauns, though
wood-spirits, were believed to foster the growth of the
crops.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 10.</note> We have already seen how often the corn-spirit
is represented in folk-custom as a goat.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On the
whole, then, as Mannhardt argues,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> ch. iii.</note> the Pans, Satyrs,
and Fauns appear to belong to a widely diffused class
of wood-spirits conceived in goat-form. The fondness
of goats for straying in woods and nibbling the bark of
trees&mdash;to which it is well known that they are most
destructive&mdash;is an obvious and perhaps sufficient reason
why wood-spirits should so often be supposed to take
the form of goats. The inconsistency of a god of
vegetation subsisting upon the vegetation which he
personifies is not one to strike the primitive mind.
Such inconsistencies arise when the deity, ceasing to
be immanent in the vegetation, comes to be regarded
as its owner or lord; for the idea of owning the
vegetation naturally leads to that of subsisting on it.
We have already seen that the corn-spirit, originally
conceived as immanent in the corn, afterwards comes
to be regarded as its owner, who lives on it and is
reduced to poverty and want by being deprived of it.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 379 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Thus the representation of wood-spirits in goat-form
appears to be both widespread and, to the primitive
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
mind, natural. Therefore when we find, as we
have done, that Dionysus&mdash;a tree-god&mdash;is sometimes
represented in goat form,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 326 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> we can hardly avoid concluding
that this representation is simply a part of his
proper character as a tree-god and is not to be explained
by the fusion of two distinct and independent cults, in
one of which he originally appeared as a tree-god and
in the other as a goat. If such a fusion took place in
the case of Dionysus, it must equally have taken place
in the case of the Pans and Satyrs of Greece, the
Fauns of Italy, and the <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschie</foreign> of Russia. That such
a fusion of two wholly disconnected cults should have
occurred once is possible; that it should have occurred
twice independently is improbable; that it should have
occurred thrice independently is so unlikely as to be
practically incredible.
</p>

<p>
Dionysus was also represented, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
in the form of a bull. After what has gone before we
are naturally led to expect that his bull form must have
been only another expression for his character as a
deity of vegetation, especially as the bull is a common
embodiment of the corn-spirit in Northern Europe;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and
the close association of Dionysus with Demeter and
Proserpine in the mysteries of Eleusis shows that he
had at least strong agricultural affinities. The other
possible explanation of the bull-shaped Dionysus would
be that the conception of him as a bull was originally
entirely distinct from the conception of him as a deity
of vegetation, and that the fusion of the two conceptions
was due to some such circumstance as the union of two
tribes, one of which had previously worshipped a bull-god
and the other a tree-god. This appears to be the
view taken by Mr. Andrew Lang, who suggests that
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
the bull-formed Dionysus <q>had either been developed
out of, or had succeeded to the worship of a bull-totem.</q><note place='foot'>A. Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Myth, Ritual, and Religion</hi>, ii. 232.</note>
Of course this is possible. But it is not yet certain
that the Aryans ever had totemism. On the other
hand, it is quite certain that many Aryan peoples have
conceived deities of vegetation as embodied in animal
forms. Therefore when we find amongst an Aryan
people like the Greeks a deity of vegetation represented
as an animal, the presumption must be in favour of
explaining this by a principle which is certainly known
to have influenced the Aryan race rather than by one
which is not certainly known to have done so. In the
present state of our knowledge, therefore, it is safer to
regard the bull form of Dionysus as being, like his
goat form, an expression of his proper character as a
deity of vegetation.
</p>

<p>
The probability of this view will be somewhat
increased if it can be shown that in other rites than
those of Dionysus the ancients slew an ox as a representative
of the spirit of vegetation. This they appear
to have done in the Athenian sacrifice known as <q>the
murder of the ox</q> (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>). It took place about
the end of June or beginning of July, that is, about the
time when the threshing is nearly over in Attica.
According to tradition the sacrifice was instituted to
procure a cessation of drought and barrenness which had
afflicted the land. The ritual was as follows. Barley
mixed with wheat, or cakes made of them, were laid
upon the bronze altar of Zeus Polieus on the Acropolis.
Oxen were driven round the altar, and the ox which
went up to the altar and ate the offering on it was sacrificed.
The axe and knife with which the beast was
slain had been previously wetted with water brought
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
by maidens called <q>water-carriers.</q> The weapons
were then sharpened and handed to the butchers, one
of whom felled the ox with the axe and another cut
its throat with the knife. As soon as he had felled the
ox, the former threw the axe from him and fled; and
the man who cut the beast's throat apparently imitated
his example. Meantime the ox was skinned and all
present partook of its flesh. Then the hide was stuffed
with straw and sewed up; next the stuffed animal was
set on its feet and yoked to a plough as if it were
ploughing. A trial then took place in an ancient law-court
presided over by the King (as he was called) to
determine who had murdered the ox. The maidens
who had brought the water accused the men who
had sharpened the axe and knife; the men who had
sharpened the axe and knife blamed the men who
had handed these implements to the butchers; the
men who had handed the implements to the butchers
blamed the butchers; and the butchers laid the blame
on the axe and knife, which were accordingly found
guilty, condemned, and cast into the sea.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 24, 4; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, i. 28, 10;
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Var. Hist.</hi> viii. 3; Schol. on
Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Peace</hi>, 419; Hesychius,
Suidas, and <hi rend='italic'>Etymol. Magnum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
βούφονια. The date of the sacrifice
(14th Skirophorion) is given by the
Schol. on Aristophanes and the <hi rend='italic'>Etym.
Magn.</hi>; and this date corresponds,
according to Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 68),
with the close of the threshing in
Attica. No writer mentions the trial
of both the axe and the knife.
Pausanias speaks of the trial of the
axe, Porphyry and Aelian of the trial
of the knife. But from Porphyry's
description it is clear that the slaughter
was carried out by two men, one
wielding an axe and the other a knife,
and that the former laid the blame on
the latter. Perhaps the knife alone
was condemned. That the King
Archon (on whom see above, vol. i. p.
7), presided at the trial of all lifeless
objects, is mentioned by Pollux, viii.
90; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> viii. 120.</note>
</p>

<p>
The name of this sacrifice,&mdash;<q>the <emph>murder</emph> of the
ox,</q><note place='foot'>The real import of the name
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign> was first perceived by Prof.
W. Robertson Smith. See his <hi rend='italic'>Religion
of the Semites</hi>, i. 286 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>&mdash;the pains taken by each person who had a hand
in the slaughter to lay the blame on some one else,
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
together with the formal trial and punishment of the
axe or knife or both, prove that the ox was here
regarded not merely as a victim offered to a god, but
as itself a sacred creature, the slaughter of which
was sacrilege or murder. This is borne out by a
statement of Varro that to kill an ox was formerly a
capital crime in Attica.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, ii. 5, 4.
Cp. Columella, vi. praef. § 7. Perhaps,
however, Varro's statement may be
merely an inference drawn from the
ritual of the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign> and the legend
told to explain it.</note> The mode of selecting the
victim suggests that the ox which tasted the corn was
viewed as the corn-deity taking possession of his own.
This interpretation is supported by the following
custom. In Beauce, in the district of Orleans, on the
24th or 25th of April they make a straw-man called
<q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign>.</q> For they say that the old
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign> is now dead and it is necessary to make a new
one. The straw-man is carried in solemn procession
up and down the village and at last is placed upon the
oldest apple-tree. There he remains till the apples
are gathered, when he is taken down and thrown into
the water, or he is burned and his ashes cast into water.
But the person who plucks the first fruit from the tree
succeeds to the title of <q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 409.</note>. Here
the straw figure, called <q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign></q> and
placed on the apple-tree in spring, represents the spirit
of the tree, who, dead in winter, revives when the
apple-blossoms appear in spring. The fact, therefore,
that the person who plucks the first fruit from the
apple-tree receives the name of <q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign></q>
proves that he is regarded as a representative of the
tree-spirit. Primitive peoples are, as a rule, reluctant
to taste the annual first-fruits of any crop, until some
ceremony has been performed which makes it safe and
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
pious for them to do so. The reason of this reluctance
appears to be that the first-fruits either are the
property of, or actually contain, a divinity. Therefore
when a man or animal is seen boldly to appropriate
the sacred first-fruits, he or it is naturally regarded as
the divinity himself in human or animal form taking
possession of his own. The time of the Athenian
sacrifice&mdash;about the close of the threshing&mdash;suggests
that the wheat and barley laid upon the altar were
a harvest offering; and the sacramental character of
the subsequent repast&mdash;all partaking of the flesh of the
divine animal&mdash;would make it parallel to the harvest
suppers of modern Europe, in which, as we have seen,
the flesh of the animal who represents the corn-spirit is
eaten by the harvesters. Again, the tradition that the
sacrifice was instituted in order to put an end to drought
and famine is in favour of taking it as a harvest festival.
The resurrection of the corn-spirit, represented by
setting up the stuffed ox and yoking it to the plough,
may be compared with the resurrection of the tree-spirit
in the person of his representative, the Wild
Man.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 243.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ox appears as a representative of the corn-spirit
in other parts of the world. At Great Bassam,
in Guinea, two oxen are slain annually to procure a
good harvest. If the sacrifice is to be effectual, it is
necessary that the oxen should weep. So all the
women of the village sit in front of the beasts, chanting,
<q>The ox will weep; yes, he will weep!</q> From
time to time one of the women walks round the beasts,
throwing manioc meal or palm wine upon them, especially
into their eyes. When tears roll down from the
eyes of the oxen, the people dance, singing, <q>The ox
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
weeps! the ox weeps!</q> Then two men seize the tails
of the beasts and cut them off at one blow. It is
believed that a great misfortune will happen in the
course of the year if the tails are not severed at one
blow. The oxen are afterwards killed, and their flesh
is eaten by the chiefs.<note place='foot'>Hecquard, <hi rend='italic'>Reise an die Küste und in das Innere von West-Afrika</hi>, pp.
41-43.</note> Here the tears of the oxen,
like those of the human victims amongst the Khonds,
are probably a rain-charm. We have already seen
that the virtue of the corn-spirit, embodied in animal
form, is sometimes supposed to reside in the tail, and
that the last handful of corn is sometimes conceived as
the tail of the corn-spirit.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, and vol. i. p. 408.</note> Still more clearly does the
ox appear as a personification of the corn-spirit in a
ceremony which is observed in all the provinces and
districts of China to welcome the approach of spring.
On the first day of spring the governor or prefect of
the city goes in procession to the east gate of the city,
and sacrifices to the Divine Husbandman, who is
represented with a bull's head on the body of a man.
A large effigy of an ox, cow, or buffalo has been prepared
for the occasion, and stands outside of the east
gate, with agricultural implements beside it. It is
made of differently-coloured pieces of paper pasted on
a framework either by a blind man or according to the
directions of a necromancer. The colours of the paper
indicate the character of the coming year; if red prevails,
there will be many fires; if white, there will be
floods and rain, etc. The mandarins walk slowly
round the ox, beating it severely at each step with rods
of various colours. It is filled with five kinds of grain,
which pour forth when the ox is broken by the blows
of the rods. The paper fragments are then set on fire,
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
and a scramble takes place for the burning fragments,
as the people believe that whoever gets one of them is
sure to be fortunate throughout the year. A live
buffalo is then killed, and its flesh is divided among
the mandarins. According to one account, the effigy
of the ox is made of clay, and, after being beaten by
the governor, is stoned by the people till they break it
in pieces, <q>from which they expect an abundant
year.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>China Review</hi>, i. 62, 154, 162, 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Doolittle, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life of the Chinese</hi>,
p. 375 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. Paxton Hood; Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi>, ii. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the corn-spirit appears to be plainly
represented by the corn-filled ox, whose fragments
may therefore be supposed to bring fertility with them.
We may compare the Silesian spring custom of burning
the effigy of Death, scrambling for the burning
fragments, and burying them in the fields to secure a
good crop, and the Florentine custom of sawing the
Old Woman and scrambling for the dried fruits with
which she was filled.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 261, 267.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the whole, then, we may perhaps conclude that
both as a goat and as a bull Dionysus was essentially
a god of vegetation. The Chinese and European
customs just referred to may perhaps shed light on
the custom of rending a live bull or goat at the rites of
Dionysus. The animal was torn in fragments, as the
Khond victim was cut in pieces, in order that the
worshippers might each secure a portion of the life-giving
and fertilising influence of the god. The flesh
was eaten raw as a sacrament, and we may conjecture
that some of it was taken home to be buried in the
fields, or otherwise employed so as to convey to the
fruits of the earth the quickening influence of the god
of vegetation. The resurrection of Dionysus, related
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
in his myth, may have been represented in his rites by
stuffing and setting up the slain ox, as was done at the
Athenian <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Passing next to the corn-goddess Demeter, and
remembering that in European folk-lore the pig is a
common embodiment of the corn-spirit,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> we may now
ask, may not the pig, which was so closely associated
with Demeter, be nothing but the goddess herself in
animal form? The pig was sacred to her;<note place='foot'>Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Acharn.</hi>
747.</note> in art she
was represented carrying or accompanied by a pig;<note place='foot'>Overbeck, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Kunstmythologie</hi>,
ii. 493; Müller-Wieseler,
<hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler d. alt. Kunst</hi>, ii. pl. viii. 94.</note>
and the pig was regularly sacrificed in her mysteries,
the reason assigned being that the pig injures the corn
and is therefore an enemy of the goddess.<note place='foot'>Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 277; Cornutus,
<hi rend='italic'>De nat. deor.</hi> c. 28; Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi>
i. 12, 23; Schol. on Aristophanes,
<hi rend='italic'>Acharn.</hi> 747; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> on <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 338;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> on <hi rend='italic'>Peace</hi>, 374; Servius on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> ii. 380; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat.
Anim.</hi> x. 16.</note> But after
an animal has been conceived as a god or a god as an
animal, it sometimes happens, as we have seen, that
the god sloughs off his animal form and becomes
purely anthropomorphic; and that then the animal,
which at first had been slain in the character of the
god, comes to be regarded as a victim offered to the
god on the ground of its hostility to the deity; in
short, that the god is sacrificed to himself on the
ground that he is his own enemy. This happened to
Dionysus, and it may have happened to Demeter also.
And in fact the rites of one of her festivals, the Thesmophoria,
bear out the view that originally the pig
was an embodiment of the corn-goddess herself, either
Demeter or her daughter and double Proserpine. The
Thesmophoria was an autumn festival, celebrated by
women alone in October,<note place='foot'>For the authorities on the Thesmophoria and a discussion of some
doubtful points in the festival, I may
be permitted to refer to my article
<q>Thesmophoria</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Britannica</hi>, ninth ed.</note> and appears to have represented
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
with mourning rites the descent of Proserpine
(or Demeter)<note place='foot'>Photius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> στήνια, speaks of the
ascent of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Demeter</foreign> from the lower
world; and Clement of Alexandria
speaks of both Demeter and Proserpine
as having been engulfed in the chasm
(<hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. § 17). The original equivalence
of Demeter and Proserpine
must be borne steadily in mind.</note> into the lower world, and with joy her
return from the dead.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 69; Photius,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> στήνια.</note> Hence the name Descent or
Ascent variously applied to the first, and the name
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Kalligeneia</foreign> (fair-born) applied to the third day of the
festival. Now from a scholion on Lucian, first edited
in 1870,<note place='foot'>E. Rohde, <q>Unedirte Luciansscholien,
die attischen Thesmophorien
und Haloen betreffend,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches
Museum</hi>, N. F. xxv. (1870) 548
<hi rend='italic'>sqq</hi>. Two passages of classical writers
(Clemens Alex., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. § 17 and
Pausanias, ix. 8, 1) refer to the rites
described by the Scholiast on Lucian,
and had been rightly interpreted by
Lobeck (<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 827 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>)</note> we learn some details about the mode of
celebrating the Thesmophoria, which shed important
light on the part of the festival called the Descent or
the Ascent. The scholiast tells us that it was customary
at the Thesmophoria to throw pigs, cakes of
dough, and branches of pine-trees into <q>the chasms of
Demeter and Proserpine,</q> which appear to have been
sacred caverns or vaults.<note place='foot'>The scholiast speaks of them as
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>megara</foreign> and <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>adyta</foreign>. <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Megara</foreign> (from a
Phoenician word meaning <q>cavern,</q>
<q>subterranean chasm,</q> Movers, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Phoenizier</hi>, i. 220) were properly subterranean
vaults or chasms sacred to
the gods. See Hesychius, quoted by
Movers, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> (the passage does not
appear in M. Schmidt's minor edition
of Hesychius); Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De antro
nymph.</hi> 6.</note> In these caverns or vaults
there were said to be serpents, which guarded the
caverns and consumed most of the flesh of the pigs
and dough-cakes which were thrown in. Afterwards&mdash;apparently
at the next annual festival<note place='foot'>We infer this from Pausanias, ix.
8, 1, though the passage is incomplete
and apparently corrupt. For ἐν
Δωδώνῃ Lobeck proposes to read
ἀναδῦναι or ἀναδοθῆναι. At the spring
and autumn festivals of Isis at Tithorea
geese and goats were thrown into the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>adyton</foreign> and left there till the following
festival, when the remains were removed
and buried at a certain spot a
little way from the temple. Pausanias,
x. 32, 14 (9). This analogy supports
the view that the pigs thrown into the
caverns at the Thesmophoria were left
there till the next festival.</note>&mdash;the decayed
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
remains of the pigs, the cakes, and the pine-branches
were fetched by women called <q>drawers,</q> who, after
observing rules of ceremonial purity for three days,
descended into the caverns, and, frightening away the
serpents by clapping their hands, brought up the
remains and placed them on the altar. Whoever got
a piece of the decayed flesh and cakes, and sowed it
with the seed-corn in his field, was believed to be sure
of a good crop.
</p>

<p>
To explain this rude and ancient rite the following
legend was told. At the moment that Pluto
carried off Proserpine, a swineherd called Eubuleus
was herding his swine on the spot, and his herd was
engulfed in the chasm down which Pluto vanished
with Proserpine. Accordingly at the Thesmophoria
pigs were annually thrown into caverns in order
to commemorate the disappearance of the swine of
Eubuleus. It follows from this that the casting of the
pigs into the vaults at the Thesmophoria formed part
of the dramatic representation of Proserpine's descent
into the lower world; and as no image of Proserpine
appears to have been thrown in, it follows that the
descent of the pigs must have been, not an accompaniment
of her descent, but the descent itself; in short,
the pigs were Proserpine. Afterwards when Proserpine
or Demeter (for the two are equivalent) became
anthropomorphic, a reason had to be found for the
custom of throwing pigs into caverns at her festival;
and this was done by saying that when Proserpine was
carried off, there happened to be some swine browsing
near, which were swallowed up along with her. The
story is obviously a forced and awkward attempt to
bridge over the gulf between the old conception of the
corn-spirit as a pig and the new conception of her as
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
an anthropomorphic goddess. A trace of the older
conception survived in the legend that when Demeter
was looking for the lost Proserpine, the footprints of
the latter were obliterated by the footprints of a pig;<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 461-466, upon
which Gierig remarks, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sues melius
poeta omisisset in hac narratione</foreign>.</q> Such
is the wisdom of the commentator.</note>
originally, no doubt, the footprints of the pig were the
footprints of Proserpine and of Demeter herself. A
consciousness of the intimate connection of the pig
with the corn lurks in the tradition that the swineherd
Eubuleus was a brother of Triptolemus, to whom
Demeter first imparted the secret of the corn. Indeed,
according to one version of the story, Eubuleus himself
received, jointly with his brother Triptolemus, the
gift of the corn from Demeter as a reward for revealing
to her the fate of Proserpine.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 14, 3.</note> Further, it is to be
noted that at the Thesmophoria the women appear to
have eaten swine's flesh.<note place='foot'>Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>,
338.</note> The meal, if I am right,
must have been a solemn sacrament or communion,
the worshippers partaking of the body of the god.
</p>

<p>
As thus explained, the Thesmophoria has its analogies
in the folk-customs of Northern Europe which
have been already described. As at the Thesmophoria&mdash;an
autumn festival in honour of the corn-goddess&mdash;swine's
flesh was partly eaten, partly kept in
caverns till the following year, when it was taken up
to be sown with the seed-corn in the fields for the
purpose of securing a good crop; so in the neighbourhood
of Grenoble the goat killed on the harvest-field
is partly eaten at the harvest supper, partly pickled
and kept till the next harvest;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> so at Pouilly the ox
killed on the harvest-field is partly eaten by the harvesters,
partly pickled and kept till the first day of
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
sowing in spring<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>&mdash;probably to be then mixed with
the seed, or eaten by the ploughmen, or both; so at
Udvarhely the feathers of the cock which is killed in
the last sheaf at harvest are kept till spring, and then
sown with the seed on the field;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>.</note> so in Hessen and
Meiningen the flesh of pigs is eaten on Ash Wednesday
or Candlemas, and the bones are kept till sowing-time,
when they are put into the field sown or mixed with
the seed in the bag;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>.</note> so, lastly, the corn from the last
sheaf is kept till Christmas, made into the Yule Boar,
and afterwards broken and mixed with the seed-corn
at sowing in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus, to put it generally, the
corn-spirit is killed in animal form in autumn; part of
his flesh is eaten as a sacrament by his worshippers;
and part of it is kept till next sowing-time or harvest as
a pledge and security for the continuance or renewal
of the corn-spirit's energies. Whether in the interval
between autumn and spring he is conceived as dead,
or whether, like the ox in the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>, he is supposed
to come to life again immediately after being killed, is
not clear. At the Thesmophoria, according to Clement
and Pausanias, as emended by Lobeck,<note place='foot'>In Clemens Alex., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 17,
for μεγαρίζοντες χοίρους ἐκβάλλουσι
Lobeck (Aglaophamus, p. 831) would
read μεγάροις ζῶντας χοίρους ἐμβάλλουσι.
For his emendation of Pausanias, see
above, p. 45.</note> the pigs
were thrown in alive, and were supposed to reappear
at the festival of the following year. Here, therefore,
if we accept Lobeck's emendations, the corn-spirit is
conceived as alive throughout the year; he lives and
works under ground, but is brought up each autumn to be
renewed and then replaced in his subterranean abode.<note place='foot'>It is worth noting that in Crete,
which was an ancient seat of Demeter
worship (see above, vol. i. p. 331), the
pig was esteemed very sacred and was
not eaten, Athenaeus, 375 <hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi>·376 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.
This would not exclude the possibility
of its being eaten sacramentally, as at
the Thesmophoria.</note>
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
If it is objected that the Greeks never could
have conceived Demeter and Proserpine to be
embodied in the form of pigs, it may be answered that
in the cave of Phigalia in Arcadia the Black Demeter
was represented with the head and mane of a horse on
the body of a woman.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 42.</note> Between the representation of
a goddess as a pig, and the representation of her as a
woman with a horse's head, there is little to choose in
respect of barbarism. The legend told of the Phigalian
Demeter indicates that the horse was one of the
animal forms assumed in ancient Greece, as in modern
Europe,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> by the corn-spirit. It was said that in her
search for her daughter, Demeter assumed the form of
a mare to escape the addresses of Poseidon, and that,
offended at his importunity, she withdrew to the cave
of Phigalia. There, robed in black, she stayed so long
that the fruits of the earth were perishing, and mankind
would have died of famine if Pan had not soothed
the angry goddess and persuaded her to quit the cave.
In memory of this event, the Phigalians set up an
image of the Black Demeter in the cave; it represented
a woman dressed in a long robe, with the head and
mane of a horse.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 25 and 42. On the
Phigalian Demeter, see W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Black Demeter, in whose
absence the fruits of the earth perish, is plainly a
mythical expression for the state of vegetation in
winter.
</p>

<p>
Passing now to Attis and Adonis, we may note a
few facts which seem to show that these deities of
vegetation had also, like other deities of vegetation,
their animal embodiments. The worshippers of Attis
abstained from eating the flesh of swine.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This fact is
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
certainly in favour of supposing that the pig was
regarded as an embodiment of Attis. And the legend
that Attis was killed by a boar<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 296.</note> points in the same
direction. For after the examples of the goat Dionysus
and the pig Demeter it may almost be laid down
as a rule that an animal which is said to have injured
a god was originally the god himself. Perhaps the cry
of <q>Hyes Attes! Hyes Attes!</q><note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>De corona</hi>, p. 313.</note> which was raised by the
worshippers of Attis, may be neither more nor less than
<q>Pig Attis! Pig Attis!</q>&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>hyes</foreign> being possibly a Phrygian
form of the Greek <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hȳs</foreign>, <q>a pig.</q>
</p>

<p>
In regard to Adonis, his connection with the boar
was not always explained by the story that he was killed
by a boar. According to another story, a boar rent
with his tusk the bark of the tree in which the infant
Adonis was born.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 281.</note> According to another story, he was
killed by Hephaestus on Mount Lebanon while he was
hunting wild boars.<note place='foot'>Cureton, <hi rend='italic'>Spicilegium Syriacum</hi>, p.
44.</note> These variations in the legend
serve to show that, while the connection of the boar with
Adonis was certain, the reason of the connection was
not understood, and that consequently different stories
were devised to explain it. Certainly the pig was
one of the sacred animals of the Syrians. At the great
religious metropolis of Hierapolis pigs were neither
sacrificed nor eaten, and if a man touched a pig he
was unclean for the rest of the day. Some people
said this was because the pigs were unclean; others
said it was because the pigs were sacred.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 54.</note> This difference
of opinion points to a state of religious thought
and feeling in which the ideas of sanctity and uncleanness
are not yet differentiated, and which is best
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
indicated by the word taboo. It is quite consistent
with this that the pig should have been held to be
an embodiment of the divine Adonis, and the analogies
of Dionysus and Demeter make it probable that the
story of the hostility of the animal to the god was only
a modern misunderstanding of the old view of the god
as embodied in a pig. The rule that pigs were not
sacrificed or eaten by worshippers of Attis and presumably
of Adonis, does not exclude the possibility
that in these cults the pig was slain on solemn occasions
as a representative of the god and consumed
sacramentally by the worshippers. Indeed, the sacramental
killing and eating of an animal, that is the
killing and eating it as a god, implies that the animal
is sacred, and is, as a general rule, not killed.<note place='foot'>The heathen Harranians sacrificed
swine once a year and ate the flesh;
En-Nedim, in Chwolsohn's <hi rend='italic'>Die Ssabier
und der Ssabismus</hi>, ii. 42. My friend
Professor W. Robertson Smith has conjectured
that the wild boars annually
sacrificed in Cyprus on 2d April
(Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iv. 45)
represented Adonis himself. See his
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>, i. 272 sq.,
392.</note>
</p>

<p>
The attitude of the Jews to the pig was as
ambiguous as that of the heathen Syrians towards
the same animal. The Greeks could not decide
whether the Jews worshipped swine or abominated
them. On the one hand they might not eat
swine; but on the other hand they might not kill
them.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> iv. 5.</note> And if the former rule speaks for the
uncleanness, the latter speaks still more strongly
for the sanctity of the animal. For whereas both
rules may, and one rule must, be explained on the
supposition that the pig was sacred; neither rule
must, and one rule cannot, be explained on the
supposition that the pig was unclean. If, therefore,
we prefer the former supposition, we must conclude
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
that, originally at least, the pig was held to be sacred
rather than unclean by the Israelites. This is confirmed
by the fact that down to the time of Isaiah some
of the Jews used to meet secretly in gardens to eat
the flesh of swine and mice as a religious rite.<note place='foot'>Isaiah lxv. 3, 4, lxvi. 3, 17.</note>
Doubtless this was a very ancient rite, dating from
a time when both the pig and the mouse were
venerated as divine, and when their flesh was
partaken of sacramentally on rare and solemn
occasions as the body and blood of gods. And
in general it may be said that all so-called unclean
animals were originally sacred; the reason why
they were not eaten was that they were divine.
</p>

<p>
In ancient Egypt, within historical times, the pig
occupied the same dubious position as in Syria and
Palestine, though at first sight its uncleanness is
more prominent than its sanctity. The Egyptians
are generally said by Greek writers to have abhorred
the pig as a foul and loathsome animal.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 47; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 8; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> x. 16.</note> If a man
so much as touched a pig in passing, he stepped
into the river with all his clothes on, to wash off
the taint.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> To drink pig's milk was believed to cause
leprosy to the drinker.<note place='foot'>Plutarch and Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi></note> Swineherds, though natives
of Egypt, were forbidden to enter any temple, and
they were the only men who were thus excluded.
No one would give his daughter in marriage to a
swineherd, or marry a swineherd's daughter; the
swineherds married among themselves.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Yet once
a year the Egyptians sacrificed pigs to the moon
and to Osiris, and not only sacrificed them, but ate
of their flesh, though on any other day of the year
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
they would neither sacrifice them nor taste of their
flesh. Those who were too poor to offer a pig on
this day baked cakes of dough, and offered them
instead.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Aelian and
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi> Herodotus distinguishes
the sacrifice to the moon from that to
Osiris. According to him, at the
sacrifice to the moon, the extremity of
the pig's tail, together with the spleen
and the caul, were covered with fat
and burned; the rest of the flesh was
eaten. On the evening (not the eve,
see Stein on the passage) of the festival
the sacrifice to Osiris took place.
Each man slew a pig before his door,
then gave it to the swineherd, from
whom he had bought it, to take away.</note> This can hardly be explained except by
the supposition that the pig was a sacred animal
which was eaten sacramentally by his worshippers
once a year. The view that in Egypt the pig was
a sacred animal is borne out by the very facts which,
to moderns, might seem to prove the contrary. Thus
the Egyptians thought, as we have seen, that to drink
pig's milk produced leprosy. But exactly analogous
views are held by savages about the animals and
plants which they deem most sacred. Thus in the
island of Wetar (between New Guinea and Celebes)
people believe themselves to be variously descended
from wild pigs, serpents, crocodiles, turtles, dogs, and
eels; a man may not eat an animal of the kind from
which he is descended; if he does so, he will become
a leper, and go mad.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, pp.
432, 452.</note> Amongst the Omaha Indians
of North America men whose totem (sacred animal or
plant) is the elk, believe that if they ate the flesh of
the male elk they would break out in boils and white
spots in different parts of their bodies.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington), p. 225.</note> In the same
tribe men whose totem is the red maize, think that
if they ate red maize they would have running sores
all round their mouths.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 231.</note> The Bush negroes of Surinam,
who have totemism, believe that if they ate the <foreign rend='italic'>capiaï</foreign>
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
(an animal like a pig) it would give them leprosy;<note place='foot'>J. Crevaux, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages dans l'Amérique au
Sud</hi>, p. 59.</note>
probably the <foreign rend='italic'>capiaï</foreign> is one of their totems. In Samoa
each man had generally his god in the shape of some
species of animal; and if he ate one of these divine
animals, it was supposed that the god avenged himself
by taking up his abode in the eater's body, and there
generating an animal of the kind he had eaten till it
caused his death. For example, if a man whose god
was the prickly sea-urchin, ate one of these creatures,
a prickly sea-urchin grew in his stomach and killed
him. If his god was an eel, and he ate an eel, he
became very ill, and before he died the voice of the
god was heard from his stomach saying, <q>I am killing
this man; he ate my incarnation.</q><note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These examples
prove that the eating of a sacred animal is often
believed to produce skin-disease or even death; so
far, therefore, they support the view that the pig
must have been sacred in Egypt, since the effect of
drinking its milk was believed to be leprosy.
</p>

<p>
Again, the rule that, after touching a pig, a man
had to wash himself and his clothes, also favours the
view of the sanctity of the pig. For it is a common
belief that the effect of contact with a sacred object
must be removed, by washing or otherwise, before
a man is free to mingle with his fellows. Thus the
Jews wash their hands after reading the sacred
scriptures. Before coming forth from the tabernacle
after the sin-offering, the high priest had to wash
himself, and put off the garments which he had worn
in the holy place.<note place='foot'>Leviticus xvi. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It was a rule of Greek ritual
that, in offering an expiatory sacrifice, the sacrificer
should not touch the sacrifice, and that, after the
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
offering was made, he must wash his body and his
clothes in a river or spring before he could enter
a city or his own house.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstin.</hi> ii. 44. For
this and the Jewish examples I am
indebted to my friend Prof. W. Robertson
Smith.</note> The Polynesians felt
strongly the need of ridding themselves of the sacred
contagion, if it may be so called, which they caught
by touching sacred objects. Various ceremonies were
performed for the purpose of removing this sacred
contagion. For example, in Tonga a man who
happened to touch a sacred chief, or anything personally
belonging to him, as his clothes or his mat,
was obliged to go through the ceremony of touching
the soles of the chief's (or of any chief's) feet with
his hands, first applying the palm and then the back
of each hand; next he had to rinse his hands in water,
or, if there was no water near, the sap of the plantain
or banana-tree might be used as a substitute. If he
were to feed himself with his hands before he performed
this ceremony, it was believed that he would
swell up and die, or at least be afflicted with scrofula
or some other disease.<note place='foot'>Mariner, <hi rend='italic'>Tonga Islands</hi>, i. 434,
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>; ii. 82, 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We have already seen what
fatal effects are supposed to follow, and do actually
follow, from contact with a sacred object in New
Zealand.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In short, primitive man believes that what
is sacred is dangerous; it is pervaded by a sort of
electrical sanctity which communicates a shock to,
even if it does not kill, whatever comes in contact
with it. Hence the savage is unwilling to touch
or even to see that which he deems peculiarly holy.
Thus Bechuanas, of the Crocodile clan, think it
<q>hateful and unlucky</q> to meet or see a crocodile;
the sight is thought to cause inflammation of the
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
eyes. Yet the crocodile is their most sacred object;
they call it their father, swear by it, and celebrate
it in their festivals.<note place='foot'>Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, p. 211;
Livingstone, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary Travels and
Researches in South Africa</hi>, p. 255;
John Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years north of
the Orange River</hi>, p. 135 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> The goat is the sacred animal
of the Madenassana Bushmen; yet <q>to look upon
it would be to render the man for the time impure,
as well as to cause him undefined uneasiness.</q><note place='foot'>J. Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> The
Elk clan, among the Omaha Indians, believe that
even to touch the male elk would be followed by an
eruption of boils and white spots on the body.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington), p.
225.</note>
Members of the Reptile clan in the same tribe think
that if one of them touches or smells a snake, it will
make his hair white.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 275.</note> In Samoa people whose god
was a butterfly believed that if they caught a butterfly
it would strike them dead.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 76.</note> Again, in Samoa the
reddish-seared leaves of the banana-tree were commonly
used as plates for handing food; but if any
member of the Wild Pigeon clan had used banana
leaves for this purpose, it was believed that he would
have suffered from rheumatic swellings or an eruption
all over the body like chicken-pox.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 70.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the light of these parallels the beliefs and
customs of the Egyptians touching the pig are probably
to be explained as based upon an opinion of
the extreme sanctity rather than of the extreme
uncleanness of the animal; or rather, to put it more
correctly, they imply that the animal was looked on,
not simply as a filthy and disgusting creature, but as a
being endowed with high supernatural powers, and
that as such it was regarded with that primitive
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
sentiment of religious awe and fear in which the
feelings of reverence and abhorrence are almost equally
blended. The ancients themselves seem to have been
aware that there was another side to the horror with
which swine seemed to inspire the Egyptians. For
the Greek astronomer and mathematician Eudoxus,
who resided fourteen months in Egypt and conversed
with the priests,<note place='foot'>Diogenes Laertius, <hi rend='italic'>Vitae Philos.</hi>
viii. 8.</note> was of opinion that the
Egyptians spared the pig, not out of abhorrence, but
from a regard to its utility in agriculture; for, according
to him, when the Nile had subsided, herds of swine
were turned loose over the fields to tread the seed
down into the moist earth.<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> x. 16. The
story is repeated by Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xviii. 168.</note> But when a being is thus
the object of mixed and implicitly contradictory feelings,
he may be said to occupy a position of unstable
equilibrium. In course of time one of the contradictory
feelings is likely to prevail over the other, and according
as the feeling which finally predominates is that of
reverence or abhorrence, the being who is the object
of it will rise into a god or sink into a devil. The
latter, on the whole, was the fate of the pig in Egypt.
For in historical times the fear and horror of the pig
seem certainly to have outweighed the reverence and
worship of which he must once have been the object,
and of which, even in his fallen state, he never quite
lost trace. He came to be looked on as an embodiment
of Set or Typhon, the Egyptian devil and enemy
of Osiris. For it was in the shape of a boar that
Typhon menaced the eye of the god Horus, who
burned him and instituted the sacrifice of the pig, the
sun-god Ra having declared the pig abominable.<note place='foot'>Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le mythe Osirien</hi>, i. 44.</note>
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
Again, the story that Typhon was hunting a boar
when he discovered and mangled the body of Osiris,
and that this was the reason why the pig was sacrificed
once a year,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 8. Lefébure
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 46) recognises that in
this story the boar is Typhon himself.</note> is a transparent modernisation of an older
story that Osiris, like Adonis and Attis, was slain or
mangled by a boar, or by Typhon in the form of a
boar. Thus, the annual sacrifice of a pig to Osiris
might naturally be interpreted as vengeance inflicted
on the hostile animal that had slain or mangled the god.
But, in the first place, when an animal is thus killed
as a solemn sacrifice once and once only in the year, it
generally or always means that the animal is divine&mdash;that
he is spared and respected the rest of the year as a
god and slain, when he is slain, also in the character of
a god.<note place='foot'>This important principle was first
recognised by Prof. W. Robertson
Smith. See his article <q>Sacrifice,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Encycl. Britann.</hi> 9th ed. xxi. 137
sq. Cp. his <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>,
pp. 353 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 391 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the second place, the examples of Dionysus
and Demeter, if not of Attis and Adonis, have taught
us that the animal which is sacrificed to a god on the
ground that he is the god's enemy may have been, and
probably was, originally the god himself. Therefore,
the fact that the pig was sacrificed once a year to
Osiris, and the fact that he appears to have been sacrificed
on the ground that he was the god's enemy, go
to show, first, that originally the pig was a god, and,
second, that he was Osiris. At a later age the pig
was distinguished from Osiris when the latter became
anthropomorphic and his original relation to the pig
was forgotten; later still, the pig was opposed as an
enemy to Osiris by mythologists who could think of no
reason for killing an animal in connection with the
worship of a god except that the animal was the god's
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
enemy; or, as Plutarch puts it, not that which is dear
to the gods, but that which is the contrary, is fit to be
sacrificed.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 31.</note> At this later stage the havoc which a wild
boar notoriously makes amongst the corn would supply
a plausible reason for regarding him as an enemy of
the corn-spirit, though originally, if I am right, the
very fact that the boar was found ranging at will
through the corn was the reason for identifying him
with the corn-spirit, to whom he was afterwards
opposed as an enemy. The view which identifies the
pig with Osiris derives not a little support from the
fact that the day on which the pigs were sacrificed
to him was the day on which, according to tradition,
Osiris was killed;<note place='foot'>Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le mythe Osirien</hi>, p. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> for thus the killing of the pig was
the annual representation of the killing of Osiris, just
as the throwing of the pigs into the caverns at the
Thesmophoria was an annual representation of the
descent of Proserpine into the lower world; and both
customs are parallel to the European practice of killing
a goat, cock, etc., at harvest as a representative of the
corn-spirit.
</p>

<p>
Again, the view that the pig, originally Osiris
himself, afterwards came to be regarded as an embodiment
of his enemy Typhon, is supported by the similar
relation of red-haired men and red oxen to Typhon.
For in regard to the red-haired men who were burned
and whose ashes were scattered with winnowing-fans,
we have seen fair grounds for believing that originally,
like the red-haired puppies killed at Rome in spring,
they were representatives of the corn-spirit himself,
that is, of Osiris, and were slain for the express
purpose of making the corn turn red or golden.
</p>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<p>
Yet at a later time these men were explained to be
representatives, not of Osiris, but of his enemy
Typhon,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 33, 73;
Diodorus, i. 88.</note> and the killing of them was regarded as an
act of vengeance inflicted on the enemy of the god.
Similarly, the red oxen sacrificed by the Egyptians
were said to be sacrificed on the ground of their
resemblance to Typhon;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 31; Diodorus,
i. 88. Cp. Herodotus, ii. 38.</note> though it is more likely that
originally they were slain on the ground of their
resemblance to the corn-spirit Osiris. We have seen
that the ox is a common representative of the corn-spirit
and is slain as such on the harvest-field.
</p>

<p>
Osiris was regularly identified with the bull Apis
of Memphis and the bull Mnevis of Heliopolis.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 20,
29, 33, 43; Strabo, xvii. 1, 31;
Diodorus, i. 21, 85; Duncker,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
On Apis and Mnevis, see also
Herodotus, ii. 153, iii. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ammianus
Marcellinus, xxii. 14, 7;
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 184 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; 17.; Solinus,
xxxii. 17-21; Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De nat. deor.</hi>
i. 29; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> xi. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> viii. 1, 3;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 5, 35: Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>Praepar. Evang.</hi> iii. 13, 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Pausanias, i. 18, 4, vii. 22, 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Both Apis and Mnevis were
black bulls, but Apis had certain white
spots.</note> But
it is hard to say whether these bulls were embodiments
of him as the corn-spirit, as the red oxen appear to
have been, or whether they were not rather entirely
distinct deities which got fused with Osiris by syncretism.
The fact that these two bulls were
worshipped by <emph>all</emph> the Egyptians,<note place='foot'>Diodorus, i. 21.</note> seems to put them
on a different footing from the ordinary sacred animals
whose cults were purely local. Hence, if the latter
were evolved from totems, as they probably were,
some other origin would have to be found for the
worship of Apis and Mnevis. If these bulls were not
originally embodiments of the corn-god Osiris, they
may possibly be descendants of the sacred cattle
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
worshipped by a pastoral people.<note place='foot'>On the religious reverence of pastoral
peoples for their cattle, and the
possible derivation of the Apis and Isis-Hathor
worship from the pastoral stage
of society, see W. Robertson Smith,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>, i. 277 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If this were so,
ancient Egypt would exhibit a stratification of the
three great types of religion corresponding to the three
great stages of society. Totemism or (roughly speaking)
the worship of wild animals&mdash;the religion of society
in the hunting stage&mdash;would be represented by the
worship of the local sacred animals; the worship of
cattle&mdash;the religion of society in the pastoral stage&mdash;would
be represented by the cults of Apis and Mnevis;
and the worship of cultivated plants, especially of corn&mdash;the
religion of society in the agricultural stage&mdash;would
be represented by the worship of Osiris and
Isis. The Egyptian reverence for cows, which were
never killed,<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 41.</note> might belong either to the second or third
of these stages. The fact that cows were regarded
as sacred to, that is, as embodiments of Isis, who was
represented with cow's horns, would indicate that they,
like the red oxen, were embodiments of the corn-spirit.
However, this identification of Isis with the cow, like
that of Osiris with the bulls Apis and Mnevis, may
be only an effect of syncretism. But whatever the
original relation of Apis to Osiris may have been, there
is one fact about the former which ought not to be
passed over in a chapter dealing with the custom of
killing the god. Although the bull Apis was worshipped
as a god with much pomp and profound reverence, he
was not suffered to live beyond a certain length of
time which was prescribed by the sacred books, and
on the expiry of which he was drowned in a holy
spring.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 184;
Solinus, xxxii. 18; Ammianus Marcellinus,
xxii. 14, 7. The spring or
well in which he was drowned was
perhaps the one from which his drinking water was procured; he might not
drink the water of the Nile. Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 5.</note> The limit, according to Plutarch, was twenty-five
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
years;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 56.</note> but it cannot always have been enforced,
for the tombs of the Apis bulls have been discovered
in the present century, and from the inscriptions on
them it appears that in the twenty-second dynasty two
bulls lived more than twenty-six years.<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> p. 31.
Cp. Duncker, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>
i. 56.</note>
</p>

<p>
We are now in a position to hazard a conjecture&mdash;for
it can be little more&mdash;as to the meaning of the
tradition that Virbius, the first of the divine Kings of
the Wood at Aricia, was killed by horses. Having
found, first, that spirits of vegetation are not infrequently
represented in the form of horses;<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and,
second, that the animal which in later legends is said
to have injured the god was sometimes originally the
god himself, we may conjecture that the horses by
which Virbius was said to have been slain were really
embodiments of him as a deity of vegetation. The
myth that Virbius had been killed by horses was
probably invented to explain certain features in his
cult, amongst others the custom of excluding horses
from his sacred grove. For myth changes while
custom remains constant; men continue to do what
their fathers did before them, though the reasons on
which their fathers acted have been long forgotten.
The history of religion is a long attempt to reconcile
old custom with new reason; to find a sound theory
for an absurd practice. In the case before us we may
be sure that the myth is more modern than the custom
and by no means represents the original reason for
excluding horses from the grove. From the fact that
horses were so excluded it might be inferred that they
could not be the sacred animals or embodiments of the
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
god of the grove. But the inference would be rash.
The goat was at one time a sacred animal or embodiment
of Athene, as may be inferred from the practice
of representing her clad in a goat-skin (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>aegis</foreign>). Yet
the goat was neither sacrificed to her as a rule, nor
allowed to enter her great sanctuary, the Acropolis at
Athens. The reason alleged for this was that the goat
injured the olive, the sacred tree of Athene.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, 587 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat.
Hist.</hi> viii. 204. Cp. <hi rend='italic'>Encycl. Britann.</hi>
9th ed. art. <q>Sacrifice,</q> xxi. 135.</note> So far,
therefore, the relation of the goat to Athene is parallel
to the relation of the horse to Virbius, both animals
being excluded from the sanctuary on the ground of
injury done by them to the god. But from Varro we
learn that there was an exception to the rule which
excluded the goat from the Acropolis. Once a year,
he says, the goat was driven on to the Acropolis for a
necessary sacrifice.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cult.</hi> i. 2, 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now, as has been remarked
before, when an animal is sacrificed once and once
only in the year, it is probably slain, not as a victim
offered to the god, but as a representative of the god
himself. Therefore we may infer that if a goat was
sacrificed on the Acropolis once a year, it was sacrificed
in the character of Athene herself; and it may be conjectured
that the skin of the sacrificed animal was
placed on the statue of the goddess and formed the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>aegis</foreign>, which would thus be renewed annually. Similarly
at Thebes in Egypt rams were sacred and were not
sacrificed. But on one day in the year a ram was
killed, and its skin was placed on the statue of the god
Ammon.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 42.</note> Now, if we knew the ritual of the Arician
grove better, we might find the rule of excluding
horses from it, like the rule of excluding goats from
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
the Acropolis at Athens, was subject to an annual
exception, a horse being once a year taken into the
grove and sacrificed as an embodiment of the god
Virbius. By the usual misunderstanding the horse
thus killed would come in time to be regarded as an
enemy offered up in sacrifice to the god whom he had
injured, like the pig which was sacrificed to Demeter
and Osiris or the goat which was sacrificed to Athene
and Dionysus. It is so easy for a writer to record a
rule without noticing an exception that we need not
wonder at finding the rule of the Arician grove
recorded without any mention of an exception such as
I suppose. If we had had only the statements of
Athenaeus and Pliny, we should have known only the
rule which forbade the sacrifice of goats to Athene and
excluded them from the Acropolis, without being aware
of the important exception which the fortunate preservation
of Varro's work has revealed to us.
</p>

<p>
The conjecture that once a year a horse may have
been sacrificed in the Arician grove as a representative
of the deity of the grove derives some support from the
fact that a horse sacrifice of a similar character took
place once a year at Rome. On the 15th of October
in each year a chariot-race took place on the Field of
Mars. The right-hand horse of the victorious team
was sacrificed to Mars by being stabbed with a spear.
The object of the sacrifice was to ensure good crops.
The animal's head was cut off and adorned with a
string of loaves. The inhabitants of two wards&mdash;the
Sacred Way and the Subura&mdash;then contended with
each other who should get the head. If the people of
the Sacred Way got it, they fastened it to a wall of
the king's house; if the people of the Subura got it,
they fastened it to the Mamilian tower. The horse's
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
tail was cut off and carried to the king's house with
such speed that the blood dripped on the hearth of the
house.<note place='foot'>Festus, ed. Müller, pp. 178, 179,
220; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 97;
Polybius, xii. 4 B. The sacrifice is
referred to by Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> 176 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> Further, it appears that the blood of the
horse was caught and preserved till the 21st of April,
when it was mixed by the Vestal virgins with the
blood of the unborn calves which had been sacrificed
six days before. The mixture was then distributed to
shepherds, and used by them for fumigating their
flocks.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 731 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, cp. 629
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Propertius, v. 1, 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In this ceremony the decoration of the horse's head
with a string of loaves, and the alleged object of the
sacrifice, namely, to procure a good harvest, clearly
indicate that the horse was killed as one of those
animal representatives of the corn-spirit of which we
have seen so many examples. The custom of cutting
off the horse's tail is like the African custom of cutting
off the tails of the oxen and sacrificing them to obtain
a good crop.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In both the Roman and the African
custom the animal represents the corn-spirit; and its
fructifying power is supposed to reside especially in its
tail. The latter idea occurs, as we have seen, in
European folk-lore.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 408, vol. ii. p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</note> Again, the custom of fumigating
the cattle in spring with the blood of the horse may be
compared with the custom of giving the Maiden as
fodder to the cattle at Christmas, and giving the Yule
Boar to the ploughing oxen or horses to eat in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</note>
All these customs aim at ensuring the blessing of the
corn-spirit on the homestead and its inmates and
storing it up for another year.
</p>

<p>
The Roman sacrifice of the October horse, as it
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
was called, carries us back to the early days when the
Subura, afterwards a low and crowded quarter of the
great metropolis, was still a separate village, whose
inhabitants engaged in a friendly contest on the harvest-field
with their neighbours of Rome, then a little rural
town. The Field of Mars on which the ceremony took
place lay beside the Tiber, and formed part of the king's
domain down to the abolition of the monarchy. For
tradition ran that at the time when the last of the
kings was driven from Rome, the corn stood ripe for
the sickle on the crown lands beside the river; but no
one would eat the accursed grain and it was flung into
the river in such heaps that, the water being low with
the summer heat, it formed the nucleus of an island.<note place='foot'>Livy, ii. 5.</note>
The horse sacrifice was thus an old autumn custom
observed upon the king's corn-fields at the end of the
harvest. The tail and blood of the horse, as the chief
parts of the corn-spirit's representative, were taken to
the king's house and kept there; just as in Germany
the harvest-cock is nailed on the gable or over the
door of the farmhouse; and as the last sheaf, in the
form of the Maiden, is carried home and kept over the
fireplace in the Highlands of Scotland. Thus the
blessing of the corn-spirit was brought to the king's
house and hearth and, through them, to the community
of which he was the head. Similarly in the spring
and autumn customs of Northern Europe the May-pole
is sometimes set up in front of the house of
the mayor or burgomaster, and the last sheaf at
harvest is brought to him as the head of the village.
But while the tail and blood fell to the king, the
neighbouring village of the Subura, which no doubt
once had a similar ceremony of its own, was gratified
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
by being allowed to compete for the prize of the
horse's head. The Mamilian tower to which the
Suburans nailed the horse's head when they succeeded
in carrying it off, appears to have been a peel-tower or
keep of the old Mamilian family, the magnates of the
village.<note place='foot'>Festus, ed. Müller, pp. 130,
131.</note> The ceremony thus performed on the king's
fields and at his house on behalf of the whole town
and of the neighbouring village presupposes a time
when each commune performed a similar ceremony on
its own fields. In the rural districts of Latium the
villages may have continued to observe the custom,
each on its own land, long after the Roman hamlets
had merged their separate harvest-homes in the
common celebration on the king's lands.<note place='foot'>The October horse is the subject
of an essay by Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>Mytholog.
Forsch.</hi> pp. 156-201), of which the
above account is a summary.</note> There is
no intrinsic improbability in the supposition that the
sacred grove of Aricia, like the Field of Mars at Rome,
may have been the scene of a common harvest celebration,
at which a horse was sacrificed with the same rude
rites on behalf of the neighbouring villages. The
horse would represent the fructifying spirit both of the
tree and of the corn, for the two ideas melt into each
other, as we see in customs like the Harvest-May.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='11. Eating the god.'/>
<head>§ 11.&mdash;Eating the god.</head>

<p>
We have now seen that the corn-spirit is represented
sometimes in human, sometimes in animal
form, and that in both cases he is killed in the person
of his representative and eaten sacramentally. To find
examples of actually killing the human representative
of the corn-spirit we had of course to go to savage
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
races; but the harvest suppers of our European
peasants have furnished unmistakable examples of the
sacramental eating of animals as representatives of the
corn-spirit. But further, as might have been anticipated,
the new corn is itself eaten sacramentally, that
is, as the body of the corn-spirit. In Wermland,
Sweden, the farmer's wife uses the grain of the last
sheaf to bake a loaf in the shape of a little girl; this
loaf is divided amongst the whole household and eaten
by them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 179.</note> Here the loaf represents the corn-spirit
conceived as a maiden; just as in Scotland the corn-spirit
is similarly conceived and represented by the
last sheaf made up in the form of a woman and bearing
the name of the Maiden. As usual, the corn-spirit
is believed to reside in the last sheaf; and to eat a
loaf made from the last sheaf is, therefore, to eat the
corn-spirit itself. Similarly at La Palisse in France a
man made of dough is hung upon the fir-tree which is
carried on the last harvest-waggon. The tree and the
dough-man are taken to the mayor's house and kept
there till the vintage is over. Then the close of the
harvest is celebrated by a feast at which the mayor
breaks the dough-man in pieces and gives the pieces to
the people to eat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 205. It is not said that the dough-man is made of the new
corn; but probably this is, or once was, the case.</note>
</p>

<p>
In these examples the corn-spirit is represented
and eaten in human shape. In other cases, though
the new corn is not baked in loaves of human
shape, still the solemn ceremonies with which it is
eaten suffice to indicate that it is partaken of sacramentally,
that is, as the body of the corn-spirit.
For example, the following ceremonies used to be
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
observed by Lithuanian peasants at eating the new
corn. When the harvest and the sowing of the new
corn were over, each farmer held a festival called
Sabarios, that is, <q>the mixing or throwing together.</q>
He took a handful of each kind of grain&mdash;wheat,
barley, oats, flax, beans, lentils, etc.; and each handful
he divided into three parts. The twenty-seven
portions of each grain were then thrown on a heap and
all mixed up together. The grain used had to be the
grain which was first threshed and winnowed and
which had been set aside and kept for this purpose.
A part of the grain thus mixed was used to bake little
loaves, one for each of the household; the rest was
mixed with more barley or oats and made into beer.
The first beer brewed from this mixture was for the
drinking of the farmer, his wife, and children; the
second brew was for the servants. The beer being
ready, the farmer chose an evening when no stranger
was expected. Then he knelt down before the barrel
of beer, drew a jugful of the liquor and poured it on
the bung of the barrel, saying, <q>O fruitful earth, make
rye and barley and all kinds of corn to flourish.</q> Next
he took the jug to the parlour, where his wife and children
awaited him. On the floor of the parlour lay bound
a black or white or speckled (not a red) cock and a hen
of the same colour and of the same brood, which must
have been hatched within the year. Then the farmer
knelt down, with the jug in his hand, and thanked
God for the harvest and prayed for a good crop next
year. Then all lifted up their hands and said, <q>O
God, and thou, O earth, we give you this cock and
hen as a free-will offering.</q> With that the farmer
killed the fowls with the blows of a wooden spoon, for
he might not cut their heads off. After the first prayer
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
and after killing each of the birds he poured out
a third of the beer. Then his wife boiled the fowls
in a new pot which had never been used before. A
bushel was then set, bottom upwards, on the floor, and
on it were placed the little loaves mentioned above
and the boiled fowls. Next the new beer was fetched,
together with a ladle and three mugs, none of which
was used except on this occasion. When the farmer
had ladled the beer into the mugs, the family knelt
down round the bushel. The father then uttered a
prayer and drank off the three mugs of beer. The
rest followed his example. Then the loaves and the
flesh of the fowls were eaten, after which the beer
went round again, till every one had emptied each of
the three mugs nine times. None of the food should
remain over; but if anything did happen to be left,
it was consumed next morning with the same ceremonies.
The bones were then given to the dog to
eat; if he did not eat them all up, the remains were
buried under the dung in the cattle-stall. This
ceremony was observed at the beginning of December.
On the day on which it occurred no bad word might
be spoken.<note place='foot'>Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>, pp.
60-64; <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Such was the custom about two hundred years
ago. At the present day in Lithuania, when new potatoes
or loaves made from the new corn are being
eaten, all the people at table pull each other's hair.<note place='foot'>Bezzenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Litauische Forschungen</hi>
(Göttingen, 1882), p. 89.</note>
The meaning of the latter custom is obscure, but a
similar custom was certainly observed by the heathen
Lithuanians at their solemn sacrifices.<note place='foot'>Simon Grunau, <hi rend='italic'>Preussische Chronik</hi>,
ed. Perlbach, i. 91.</note> Many of the
Esthonians of the island of Oesel will not eat bread
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
baked of the new corn till they have first taken a
bite at a piece of iron.<note place='foot'>Holzmayer, <hi rend='italic'>Osiliana</hi>, p. 108.</note> The iron is here plainly a
charm, intended to render harmless the spirit that is in
the corn.<note place='foot'>On iron as a charm against spirits,
see above, vol. i. p. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Sutherlandshire at the present day,
when the new potatoes are dug all the family must
taste them, otherwise <q>the spirits in them [the
potatoes] take offence, and the potatoes would not
keep.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. 54.</note> In one part of Yorkshire it is still the
custom for the clergyman to cut the first corn; and
my informant believes that the corn so cut is used
to make the communion bread.<note place='foot'>Communicated by the Rev. J. J. C.
Yarborough, of Chislehurst, Kent. See
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. 50.</note> If the latter part
of the custom is correctly reported (and analogy is
all in its favour), it shows how the Christian communion
has absorbed within itself a sacrament which
is doubtless far older than Christianity.
</p>

<p>
At the close of the rice harvest in Boeroe, East
Indies, each clan (<foreign rend='italic'>fenna</foreign>) meets at a common sacramental
meal, to which every member of the clan is
bound to contribute a little of the new rice. This meal
is called <q>eating the soul of the rice,</q> a name which
clearly indicates the sacramental character of the
repast. Some of the rice is also set apart and
offered to the spirits.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdrage tot de
kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland
Boeroe</hi>, p. 26.</note> Amongst the Alfoers of
Celebes the priest sows the first rice-seed and plucks
the first ripe rice in each field. This rice he roasts
and grinds into meal, and gives some of it to each
of the household.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, vii. (1863) p. 127.</note> Shortly before the rice harvest
in Bolang Mongondo, Celebes, an offering is made
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
of a small pig or a fowl. Then the priest plucks
a little rice, first on his own field and then on those
of his neighbours. All the rice thus plucked by him
he dries along with his own, and then gives it back
to the respective owners, who have it ground and
boiled. When it is boiled the women take it back,
with an egg, to the priest, who offers the egg in
sacrifice and returns the rice to the women. Of
this rice every member of the family, down to the
youngest child, must partake. After this ceremony
every one is free to get in his rice.<note place='foot'>N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mededeel. v.
w. h. Nederl. Zendelinggen</hi>. xi. 369 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the
Burghers, a tribe of the Neilgherry Hills in Southern
India, the first handful of seed is sown and the first
sheaf reaped by a Curumbar&mdash;a man of a different
tribe, whom the Burghers regard as sorcerers. The
grain contained in the first sheaf <q>is that day reduced
to meal, made into cakes, and, being offered as a
first-fruit oblation, is, together with the remainder of
the sacrificed animal, partaken of by the Burgher
and the whole of his family as the meat of a federal
offering and sacrifice.</q><note place='foot'>H. Harkness, <hi rend='italic'>Description of a
Singular Aboriginal Race inhabiting
the Summit of the Neilgherry Hills</hi>, p.
56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst the Coorgs of Southern India the man
who is to cut the first sheaf of rice at harvest is
chosen by an astrologer. At sunset the whole household
takes a hot bath and then goes to the rice-field,
where the chosen reaper cuts an armful of
rice with a new sickle, and distributes two or more
stalks to all present. Then all return to the threshing-floor.
A bundle of leaves is adorned with a
stalk of rice and fastened to the post in the centre
of the threshing-floor. Enough of the new rice
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
is now threshed, cleaned, and ground to provide
flour for the dough cakes which each member of
the household is to eat. Then they go to the door
of the house, where the mistress washes the feet
of the sheaf-cutter, and presents to him, and after
him to all the rest, a brass vessel full of milk,
honey, and sugar, from which each person takes
a draught. Then the man who cut the sheaf
kneads a cake of rice meal, plantains, milk, honey,
seven new rice corns, seven pieces of cocoa-nut,
etc. Every one receives a little of this cake on
an Ashvatha leaf, and eats it. The ceremony is
then over and the sheaf-cutter mixes with the
company. When he was engaged in cutting the
rice no one might touch him.<note place='foot'>Gover, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-songs of Southern
India</hi>, p. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>,
vii. 302 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Among the Hindoos
of Southern India the eating of the new rice is the
occasion of a family festival called Pongol. The new
rice is boiled in a new pot on a fire which is kindled
at noon on the day when, according to Hindoo
astrologers, the sun enters the tropic of Capricorn.
The boiling of the pot is watched with great anxiety
by the whole family, for as the milk boils, so will the
coming year be. If the milk boils rapidly, the year
will be prosperous; but it will be the reverse if the
milk boils slowly. Some of the new boiled rice is
offered to the image of Ganesa; then every one
partakes of it.<note place='foot'>Gover, <q>The Pongol Festival in
Southern India,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. R. Asiatic
Society</hi>, N. S. v. (1871) p. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> At Gilgit, in the Hindoo Koosh,
before wheat-harvest begins, a member of every
household gathers a handful of ears of corn secretly at
dusk. A few of the ears are hung up over the door
of the house, and the rest are roasted next morning,
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
and eaten steeped in milk. The day is spent in
rejoicings, and next morning the harvest begins.<note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo
Koosh</hi>, p. 103.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ceremony of eating the new yams at Onitsha,
on the Quorra River, Guinea, is thus described:
<q>Each headman brought out six yams, and cut
down young branches of palm-leaves and placed
them before his gate, roasted three of the yams,
and got some kola-nuts and fish. After the yam
is roasted, the <foreign rend='italic'>Libia</foreign>, or country doctor, takes the
yam, scrapes it with a sort of meal, and divides
it into halves; he then takes one piece, and places
it on the lips of the person who is going to eat
the new yam. The eater then blows up the steam
from the hot yam, and afterwards pokes the whole
into his mouth, and says, <q>I thank God for being
permitted to eat the new yam;</q> he then begins
to chew it heartily, with fish likewise.</q><note place='foot'>Crowther and Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>The Gospel
on the Banks of the Niger</hi>, p. 287 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Mr. Taylor's information is repeated in
<hi rend='italic'>West African Countries and Peoples</hi>, by
J. Africanus B. Horton (London, 1868),
p. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst
the Kafirs of Natal and Zululand, no one may
eat of the new fruits till after a festival which
marks the beginning of the Kafir year. All the
people assemble at the king's kraal, where they
feast and dance. Before they separate the <q>dedication
of the people</q> takes place. Various fruits
of the earth, as corn, mealies, and pumpkins, mixed
with the flesh of a sacrificed animal and with
<q>medicine,</q> are boiled in great pots, and a little
of this food is placed in each man's mouth by the
king himself. After thus partaking of the sanctified
fruits, a man is himself sanctified for the whole year,
and may immediately get in his crops.<note place='foot'>Speckmann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Hermannsburger
Mission in Afrika</hi>, p. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the
Zulu feast of first-fruits, see also N.
Isaacs, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Adventures in
Eastern Africa</hi>, ii. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Arbousset
et Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage d'exploration</hi>, etc.
p. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Religious System
of the Amazulu</hi>, p. 389 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>South
African Folk-lore Journal</hi>, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Fritsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eingeborenen Süd-Afrikas</hi>,
p. 143; Lewis Grout, <hi rend='italic'>Zululand</hi>, p.
160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> From Mr. Grout's description
it appears that a bull is killed and its
gall drunk by the king and people.
In killing it the men must use nothing
but their naked hands. The flesh of
the bull is given to the boys to eat
what they like and burn the rest; the
men may not taste it. As a final ceremony
the king breaks a green calabash
in presence of the people, <q>thereby
signifying that he opens the new year,
and grants the people leave to eat of
the fruits of the season.</q> If a man
eats the new fruits before the festival,
he will die or is actually put to death.</note>
</p>

<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>

<p>
Amongst the Creek Indians of North America, the
<foreign rend='italic'>busk</foreign> or festival of first-fruits was the chief ceremony
of the year.<note place='foot'>The ceremony is described independently
by James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
American Indians</hi> (London, 1775), pp.
96-111; W. Bartram, <hi rend='italic'>Travels through
North and South Carolina, Georgia,
East and West Florida</hi> (London, 1792),
p. 507 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; B. Hawkins, <q>Sketch of the
Creek country,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Collections of the
Georgia Historical Society</hi>, iii. (Savannah,
1848), pp. 75-78; A. A. M'Gillivray,
in Schoolcraft's <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, v. 267
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Adair's description is the fullest
and has been chiefly followed in the
text. In <hi rend='italic'>Observations on the Creek and
Cherokee Indians</hi>, by William Bartram
(1789), <hi rend='italic'>with prefatory and supplementary
notes</hi>, by E. G. Squier, p.
75, there is a description&mdash;extracted
from an MS. of J. H. Payne (author
of <hi rend='italic'>Home, Sweet Home</hi>)&mdash;of the similar
ceremony observed by the Cherokees.
I possess a copy of this work in
pamphlet form, but it appears to be
an extract from the transactions or
proceedings of a society, probably an
American one. Mr. Squier's preface
is dated New York, 1851.</note> It was held in July or August, when
the corn was ripe, and marked the end of the old
year and the beginning of the new one. Before it
took place none of the Indians would eat or even
handle any part of the new harvest. Sometimes
each town had its own busk; sometimes several
towns united to hold one in common. Before celebrating
the busk, the people provided themselves
with new clothes and new household utensils and furniture;
they collected their old clothes and rubbish,
together with all the remaining grain and other old
provisions, cast them together in one common heap,
and consumed them with fire.<note place='foot'>W. Bartram, <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>, p. 507.</note> As a preparation for
the ceremony, all the fires in the village were extinguished,
and the ashes swept clean away. In particular,
the hearth or altar of the temple was dug up and the
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
ashes carried out. Then the chief priest put some
roots of the button-snake plant, with some green tobacco
leaves and a little of the new fruits, at the bottom of
the fireplace, which he afterwards ordered to be covered
up with white clay, and wetted over with clean water.
A thick arbour of green branches of young trees was
then made over the altar.<note place='foot'>So amongst the Cherokees, according
to J. H. Payne, an arbour of green
boughs was made in the sacred square;
then <q>a beautiful bushy-topped shade-tree
was cut down close to the roots,
and planted in the very centre of the
sacred square. Every man then provided
himself with a green bough.</q></note> Meanwhile the women at
home were cleaning out their houses, renewing the old
hearths, and scouring all the cooking vessels that they
might be ready to receive the new fire and the new
fruits.<note place='foot'>So Adair. Bartram, on the other
hand, as we have seen, says that the
old vessels were burned and new ones
prepared for the festival.</note> The public or sacred square was carefully
swept of even the smallest crumbs of previous feasts,
<q>for fear of polluting the first-fruit offerings.</q> Also
every vessel that had contained or had been used about
any food during the expiring year was removed from
the temple before sunset. Then all the men who were
not known to have violated the law of the first-fruit
offering and that of marriage during the year were
summoned by a crier to enter the holy square and
observe a solemn fast. But the women (except six
old ones), the children, and all who had not attained
the rank of warriors were forbidden to enter the
square. Sentinels were also posted at the corners of
the square to keep out all persons deemed impure and
all animals. A strict fast was then observed for two
nights and a day, the devotees drinking a bitter decoction
of button-snake root <q>in order to vomit and purge
their sinful bodies.</q> That the people outside the square
might also be purified, one of the old men laid down a
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
quantity of green tobacco at a corner of the square;
this was carried off by an old woman and distributed
to the people without, who chewed and swallowed it
<q>in order to afflict their souls.</q> During this general
fast, the women, children, and men of weak constitution
were allowed to eat after mid-day, but not before. On
the morning when the fast ended, the women brought
a quantity of the old year's food to the outside of the
sacred square. These provisions were then brought
in and set before the famished multitude, but all traces
of them had to be removed before noon. When the
sun was declining from the meridian, all the people
were commanded by the voice of a crier to stay within
doors, to do no bad act, and to be sure to extinguish
and throw away every spark of the old fire. Universal
silence now reigned. Then the high priest made the
new fire by the friction of two pieces of wood, and
placed it on the altar under the green arbour. This
new fire was believed to atone for all past crimes
except murder. Then a basket of new fruits was
brought; the high priest took out a little of each sort
of fruit, rubbed it with bear's oil, and offered it, together
with some flesh, <q>to the bountiful holy spirit of fire,
as a first-fruit offering, and an annual oblation for sin.</q>
He also consecrated the sacred emetics (the button-snake
root and the cassina or black-drink) by pouring
a little of them into the fire. The persons who had
remained outside now approached, without entering,
the sacred square; and the chief priest thereupon made
a speech, exhorting the people to observe their old
rites and customs, announcing that the new divine fire
had purged away the sins of the past year, and earnestly
warning the women that, if any of them had not
extinguished the old fire, or had contracted any impurity,
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
they must forthwith depart, <q>lest the divine fire
should spoil both them and the people.</q> Some of the
new fire was then laid down outside the holy square;
the women carried it home joyfully, and laid it on their
unpolluted hearths. When several towns had united
to celebrate the festival, the new fire might thus be
carried for several miles. The new fruits were then
dressed on the new fires and eaten with bear's oil,
which was deemed indispensable. At one point of the
festival the men rubbed the new corn between their
hands, then on their faces and breasts.<note place='foot'>B. Hawkins, <q>Sketch,</q> etc., p. 76.</note> During
the festival which followed, the warriors, dressed in
their wild martial array, their heads covered with
white down and carrying white feathers in their hands,
danced round the sacred arbour, under which burned
the new fire. The ceremonies lasted eight days, during
which the strictest continence was practised. Towards
the conclusion of the festival the warriors fought
a mock battle; then the men and women together, in
three circles, danced round the sacred fire. Lastly, all
the people smeared themselves with white clay and
bathed in running water. They came out of the water
<q>believing themselves out of the reach of temporal
evil for their past vicious conduct.</q> So they departed
in joy and peace.
</p>

<p>
The solemn preparations thus made for eating the
new corn prove that it was eaten as a sacrament. In
the Boeroe and Creek customs, this sacrament is combined
with a sacrifice, and in course of time the sacrifice
of first-fruits tends to throw the sacrament into
the shade, if not to supersede it. The mere fact of
having offered the first-fruits to the gods or ancestral
spirits comes now to be thought a sufficient preparation
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
for eating the new corn; the gods having received
their share, man is free to enjoy the rest. This
mode of viewing the new fruits implies that they are
regarded no longer as themselves instinct with divine
life, but merely as a gift bestowed by the gods upon
man, who is bound to express his gratitude and homage
to his divine benefactors by presenting them with
a portion of the fruits of the earth. But with sacrifice,
as distinct from sacrament, we are not here concerned.<note place='foot'>See Note on <q>Offerings of first-fruits</q> at the end of the volume.</note>
</p>

<p>
The custom of eating bread sacramentally as the
body of a god was practised by the Aztecs before the
discovery and conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards.
Twice a year, in May and December, an image of the
great Mexican god Huitzilopochtli or Vitzilipuztli was
made of dough, then broken in pieces, and solemnly
eaten by his worshippers. The May ceremony is thus
described by the historian Acosta. <q>Two daies before
this feast, the virgins whereof I have spoken (the
which were shut up and secluded in the same temple
and were as it were religious women) did mingle a
quantitie of the seede of beetes with roasted Mays
[maize], and then they did mould it with honie, making
an idol of that paste in bignesse like to that of wood,
putting insteede of eyes graines of greene glasse, of
blue or white; and for teeth graines of Mays set
forth with all the ornament and furniture that I have
said. This being finished, all the Noblemen came and
brought it an exquisite and rich garment, like unto that
of the idol, wherewith they did attyre it. Being thus
clad and deckt, they did set it in an azured chaire and
in a litter to carry it on their shoulders. The morning
of this feast being come, an houre before day all the
maidens came forth attired in white, with new ornaments,
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
the which that day were called the Sisters of
their god Vitzilipuztli, they came crowned with garlands
of Mays rosted and parched, being like unto azahar
or the flower of orange; and about their neckes they
had great chaines of the same, which went bauldricke-wise
under their left arme. Their cheekes were died
with vermillion, their armes from the elbow to the
wrist were covered with red parrots' feathers.</q> Young
men, crowned like the virgins with maize, then carried
the idol in its litter to the foot of the great pyramid-shaped
temple, up the steep and narrow steps of which
it was drawn to the music of flutes, trumpets, cornets,
and drums. <q>While they mounted up the idoll all the
people stoode in the Court with much reverence and
feare. Being mounted to the top, and that they had
placed it in a little lodge of roses which they held
readie, presently came the yong men, which strawed
many flowers of sundrie kindes, wherewith they filled
the temple both within and without. This done, all
the virgins came out of their convent, bringing peeces
of paste compounded of beetes and rosted Mays, which
was of the same paste whereof their idol was made
and compounded, and they were of the fashion of great
bones. They delivered them to the yong men, who
carried them up and laide them at the idoll's feete,
wherewith they filled the whole place that it could
receive no more. They called these morcells of paste
the flesh and bones of Vitzilipuztli.</q> Then the priests
came in their robes of office, <q>and putting themselves
in order about these morsells and peeces of paste, they
used certaine ceremonies with singing and dauncing.
By means whereof they were blessed and consecrated
for the flesh and bones of this idoll.... The
ceremonies, dauncing, and sacrifice ended, they went
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
to unclothe themselves, and the priests and superiors
of the temple tooke the idoll of paste, which they
spoyled of all the ornaments it had, and made many
peeces, as well of the idoll itselfe as of the tronchons
which were consecrated, and then they gave them to
the people in maner of a communion, beginning with
the greater, and continuing unto the rest, both men,
women, and little children, who received it with such
teares, feare, and reverence as it was an admirable
thing, saying that they did eate the flesh and bones of
God, wherewith they were grieved. Such as had any
sicke folkes demaunded thereof for them, and carried it
with great reverence and veneration.</q><note place='foot'>Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and Moral History of
the Indies</hi>, bk. v. c. 24, vol. ii.
pp. 356-360 (Hakluyt Society, 1880).</note>
</p>

<p>
Before the festival in December, which took place
at the winter solstice, an image of the god Huitzilopochtli
was made of seeds of various sorts kneaded
into a dough with the blood of children. The bones
of the god were represented by pieces of acacia wood,
This image was placed on the chief altar of the temple,
and on the day of the festival the king offered incense
to it. Early next day it was taken down and set on
its feet in a great hall. Then a priest took a flint-tipped
dart and hurled it into the breast of the dough-image,
piercing it through and through. This was
called <q>killing the god Huitzilopochtli so that his body
might be eaten.</q> One of the priests cut out the heart
of the image and gave it to the king to eat. The
rest of the image was divided into minute pieces, of
which every man great and small, down to the male
children in the cradle, received one to eat. But no
woman might taste a morsel. The ceremony was
called <foreign rend='italic'>teoqualo</foreign>, that is, <q>god is eaten.</q><note place='foot'>Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific
States</hi>, iii. 297-300 (after Torquemada);
Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, trans. by
Cullen, i. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
générale des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</hi>,
traduite et annotée par Jourdanet
et Siméon (Paris, 1880), p. 203
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. G. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der amerikanischen
Urreligionen</hi>, p. 605.</note>
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
At another festival the Mexicans made little
images in human shape to represent the cloud-capped
mountains. These images were made of paste of
various seeds and were dressed in paper ornaments.
Some people made five, others ten, others as many
as fifteen of these paste images. They were placed
in the oratory of each house and worshipped. Four
times in the course of the night offerings of food were
made to them in tiny vessels; and people sang and
played the flute before them all night. At break of
day the priests stabbed the images with a weaver's
instrument, cut off their heads, and tore out their
hearts, which they presented to the master of the
house on a green saucer. The bodies of the images
were then eaten by all the family, especially by the
servants, <q>in order that by eating them they might be
preserved from certain distempers, to which those
persons who were negligent of worship to those deities
conceived themselves to be subject.</q> <note place='foot'>Clavigero, i. 311; Sahagun, pp.
74, 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Müller, p. 606; Bancroft,
iii. 316. This festival took place on
the last day of the 16th month (which
extended from 23d December to 11th
January). At another festival the Mexicans
made the semblance of a bone out
of paste and ate it sacramentally as the
bone of the god. Sahagun, p. 33.</note>
</p>

<p>
We are now able to suggest an explanation of the
proverb <q>there are many Manii at Aricia.</q><note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Certain
loaves made in the shape of men were called by the
Romans <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>maniae</foreign>, and it appears that this kind of loaf
was especially made at Aricia.<note place='foot'>Festus, ed. Müller, pp. 128, 129,
145. The reading of the last passage
is, however, uncertain (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et Ariciae
genus panni fieri; quod manici † appelletur</foreign></q>).</note> Now, Mania, the
name of one of these loaves, was also the name of the
Mother or Grandmother of Ghosts,<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De ling. lat.</hi> ix. 61;
Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adv. nationes</hi>, iii. 41;
Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn</hi>, i. 7, 35; Festus, p.
128, ed. Müller. Festus speaks of the
mother or grandmother of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>larvae</foreign>;
the other writers speak of the mother
of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lares</foreign>.</note> to whom woollen
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
effigies of men and women were dedicated at the
festival of the Compitalia. These effigies were hung
at the doors of all the houses in Rome; one effigy
was hung up for every free person in the house, and
one effigy, of a different kind, for every slave. The
reason was that on this day the ghosts of the dead
were believed to be going about, and it was hoped
that they would carry off the effigies at the door
instead of the living people in the house. According
to tradition, these woollen figures were substitutes for
a former custom of sacrificing human beings.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Festus, pp. 121,
239, ed. Müller. The effigies hung up
for the slaves were called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pilae</foreign>, not
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>maniae</foreign>. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pilae</foreign> was also the name
given to the straw-men which were
thrown to the bulls to gore in the
arena. Martial, <hi rend='italic'>Epigr.</hi> ii. 43, 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Asconius, <hi rend='italic'>In Cornel.</hi> p. 55, ed. Kiessling
and Schoell.</note> Upon
data so fragmentary and uncertain, it is of course
impossible to build with certainty; but it seems worth
suggesting that the loaves in human form, which
appear to have been baked at Aricia, were sacramental
bread, and that in the old days, when the divine King
of the Wood was annually slain, loaves were made in
his image, like the paste figures of the gods in Mexico,
and were eaten sacramentally by his worshippers.<note place='foot'>The ancients were at least familiar
with the practice of sacrificing images
made of dough or other materials as
substitutes for the animals themselves.
It was a recognised principle that when
an animal could not be easily obtained
for sacrifice, it was lawful to offer an
image of it made of bread or wax.
Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> ii. 116.
(Similarly a North-American Indian
dreamed that a sacrifice of twenty
elans was necessary for the recovery
of a sick girl; but the elans could not
be procured, and the girl's parents were
allowed to sacrifice twenty loaves instead.
<hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jesuites</hi>, 1636, p.
11, ed. 1858). Poor people who could
not afford to sacrifice real animals
offered dough images of them. Suidas,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> βοῦς ἕβδομος; cp. Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s. vv.</hi>
βοῦς, ἕβδομος βοῦς. Hence bakers made
a regular business of baking cakes in
the likeness of all the animals which
were sacrificed to the gods. Proculus,
quoted and emended by Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>,
p. 1079. When Cyzicus was
besieged by Mithridates and the people
could not procure a black cow to sacrifice
at the rites of Proserpine, they
made a cow of dough and placed it at
the altar. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Lucullus</hi>, 10.
In a Boeotian sacrifice to Hercules, in
place of the ram which was the proper
victim, an apple was regularly substituted,
four chips being stuck in it to
represent legs and two to represent
horns. Pollux, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Athenians
are said to have once offered to Hercules
a similar substitute for an ox. Zenobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Cent.</hi> v. 22. And the Locrians, being
at a loss for an ox to sacrifice, made
one out of figs and sticks, and offered
it instead of the animal. Zenobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Cent.</hi> v. 5. At the Athenian festival
of the Diasia cakes shaped like animals
were sacrificed. Schol. on Thucydides,
i. 126, quoted by Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> We
have seen above (p. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>) that the poorer
Egyptians offered dough images of pigs
and ate them sacramentally.</note>
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
The Mexican sacraments in honour of Huitzilopochtli
were also accompanied by the sacrifice of human
victims. The tradition that the founder of the sacred
grove at Aricia was a man named Manius, from
whom many Manii were descended, would thus be an
etymological myth invented to explain the name
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>maniae</foreign> as applied to these sacramental loaves. A
dim recollection of the original connection of these
loaves with human sacrifices may perhaps be traced
in the story that the effigies dedicated to Mania at
the Compitalia were substitutes for human victims.
The story itself, however, is probably devoid of
foundation, since the practice of putting up dummies
to divert the attention of demons from living people
is not uncommon. For example, when an epidemic is
raging, some of the Dyaks of Borneo set up wooden
images at their doors, in the hope that the demons of
the plague will be deceived into carrying off the images
instead of the people.<note place='foot'>P. J. Veth, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo's Wester Afdeeling</hi>,
ii. 309.</note> The Minahassa of Celebes
will sometimes transport a sick man to another house,
leaving on his bed a dummy made up of a pillow and
clothes. This dummy the demon is supposed to take
by mistake for the sick man, who consequently recovers.<note place='foot'>N. Graafland, <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi>, i.
326.</note>
Similarly in Burma it is thought that a patient
will recover if an effigy be buried in a small coffin.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, ii.
138.</note>
</p>

<p>
The custom of killing the god has now been traced
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
amongst peoples who have reached the agricultural
stage of society. We have seen that the spirit of the
corn, or of other cultivated plants, is commonly represented
either in human or in animal form, and that a
custom has prevailed of killing annually either the
human or the animal representative of the god. The
reason for thus killing the corn-spirit in the person of
his representative has been given implicitly in the
earlier part of this chapter. But, further, we have
found a widespread custom of eating the god sacramentally,
either in the shape of the man or animal who
represents the god, or in the shape of bread made in
human or animal form. The reasons for thus partaking
of the body of the god are, from the primitive standpoint,
simple enough. The savage commonly believes
that by eating the flesh of an animal or man he
acquires not only the physical, but even the moral and
intellectual qualities which were characteristic of that
animal or man. To take examples. The Creeks,
Cherokees, and kindred tribes of North American
Indians <q>believe that nature is possessed of such a
property, as to transfuse into men and animals the
qualities, either of the food they use, or of those objects
that are presented to their senses; he who feeds on
venison is, according to their physical system, swifter
and more sagacious than the man who lives on the
flesh of the clumsy bear, or helpless dunghill fowls, the
slow-footed tame cattle, or the heavy wallowing swine.
This is the reason that several of their old men recommend,
and say, that formerly their greatest chieftains
observed a constant rule in their diet, and seldom ate
of any animal of a gross quality, or heavy motion of
body, fancying it conveyed a dulness through the whole
system, and disabled them from exerting themselves
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
with proper vigour in their martial, civil, and religious
duties.</q><note place='foot'>James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
American Indians</hi>, p. 133.</note> The Zaparo Indians of South America <q>will,
unless from necessity, in most cases not eat any heavy
meats, such as tapir and peccary, but confine themselves
to birds, monkeys, deer, fish, etc., principally
because they argue that the heavier meats make them
unwieldy, like the animals who supply the flesh, impeding
their agility, and unfitting them for the chase.</q><note place='foot'>Alfred Simson, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the
Wilds of Ecuador</hi> (London, 1887), p.
168; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthrop.
Institute</hi>, vii. 503.</note>
The Namaquas abstain from eating the flesh of hares,
because they think it would make them faint-hearted
as a hare. But they eat the flesh of the lion, or drink
the blood of the leopard or lion to get the courage and
strength of these beasts.<note place='foot'>Theophilus Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Tsuni-Goam,
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</hi>,
p. 106. Compare John Buchanan,
<hi rend='italic'>The Shire Highlands</hi>, pg. 138; Callaway,
<hi rend='italic'>Religious System of the Amazulu</hi>,
p. 438 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> The Arabs of Eastern
Africa believe that an unguent of lion's fat inspires a
man with boldness, and makes the wild beasts flee
in terror before him.<note place='foot'>Jerome Becker, <hi rend='italic'>La Vie en Afrique</hi>,
(Paris and Brussels, 1887), ii. 366.</note> When a serious disease has
attacked a Zulu kraal, the medicine-man takes the
bone of a very old dog, which has died a natural death
from mere old age, or the bone of an old cow, bull, or
other very old animal, and administers it to the healthy
as well as to the sick people, in order that they may
live to be as old as the animal of whose bone they have
partaken.<note place='foot'>Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Nursery Tales, Traditions,
and Histories of the Zulus</hi>, p. 175
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> The Miris of Northern India prize tiger's
flesh as food for men; it gives them strength and
courage. But <q>it is not suited for women; it would
make them too strong-minded.</q><note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p.
33.</note> Amongst the Dyaks
of North-west Borneo young men and warriors may
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
not eat venison, because it would make them as timid
as deer; but the women and very old men are free to
eat it.<note place='foot'>St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the Forests of the
Far East</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 186, 206.</note> Men of the Buro and Aru Islands, East Indies,
eat the flesh of dogs in order to be bold and nimble in
war.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, pp.
10, 262.</note> Amongst the Papuans of the Port Moresby and
Motumotu districts, New Guinea, young lads eat strong
pig, wallaby, and large fish, in order to acquire the
strength of the animal or fish.<note place='foot'>James Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in
New Guinea</hi>, p. 166.</note> In Corea the bones of
tigers fetch a higher price than those of leopards as
a means of inspiring courage. A Chinaman in Soul
bought and ate a whole tiger to make himself brave
and fierce.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Proceedings Royal Geogr. Society</hi>,
N. S. viii. (1886) p. 307.</note> The special seat of courage, according to
the Chinese, is the gall-bladder; so they sometimes
procure the gall-bladders of tigers and bears, and eat
the bile in the belief that it will give them courage.<note place='foot'>J. Henderson, <q>The Medicine and
Medical Practice of the Chinese,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
North China Branch R. Asiatic Society</hi>,
New Series, i. (Shanghai, 1865) p. 35
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Norse history, Ingiald, son of King Aunund, was
timid in his youth, but after eating the heart of a wolf
he became very bold; and Hialto gained strength and
courage by eating the heart of a bear and drinking its
blood.<note place='foot'>Müller on Saxo Grammaticus,
vol. ii. p. 60.</note> In Morocco lethargic patients are given ants
to swallow; and to eat lion's flesh will make a coward
brave.<note place='foot'>Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>, p.
281.</note> When a child is late in learning to speak,
the Turks of Central Asia will give it the tongues
of certain birds to eat.<note place='foot'>Vambery, <hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi>, p.
218.</note> A North American Indian
thought that brandy must be a decoction of hearts and
tongues, <q>Because,</q> said he, <q>after drinking it I fear nothing,
and I talk wonderfully.</q><note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, vi. 8.</note> The people of Darfur,
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
in Central Africa, think that the liver is the seat of the
soul, and that a man may enlarge his soul by eating
the liver of an animal. <q>Whenever an animal is killed
its liver is taken out and eaten, but the people are
most careful not to touch it with their hands, as it is
considered sacred; it is cut up in small pieces and
eaten raw, the bits being conveyed to the mouth on
the point of a knife, or the sharp point of a stick. Any
one who may accidentally touch the liver is strictly
forbidden to partake of it, which prohibition is regarded
as a great misfortune for him.</q> Women are
not allowed to eat liver, because they have no soul.<note place='foot'>Felkin, <q>Notes on the For tribe
of Central Africa,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the
Royal Society of Edinburgh</hi>, xiii. (1884-1886)
p. 218.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the flesh and blood of brave men are commonly
eaten and drunk to inspire bravery. The Australian
Kamilaroi eat the heart and liver of a brave
man to get his courage.<note place='foot'>W. Ridley, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi</hi>, p. 160.</note> It is a common practice with
the Australian blacks to kill a man, cut out his caul-fat,
and rub themselves with it, <q>the belief being that all
the qualifications, both physical and mental, of the
previous owner of the fat were thus communicated to
him who used it.</q><note place='foot'>Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, ii. 313.</note> The Italones of the Philippine
Islands drink the blood of their slain enemies, and eat
part of the back of their heads and of their entrails
raw, in order to acquire their courage. For the same
reason the Efugaos, another tribe of the Philippines,
suck the brains of their foes.<note place='foot'>Blumentritt, <q>Der Ahnencultus
und die religiösen Anschauungen der
Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen d. Wiener Geogr.
Gesellschaft</hi>, 1882, p. 154.</note> Amongst the Kimbunda
of Western Africa, when a new king succeeds to the
throne, a brave prisoner of war is killed in order that
the king and nobles may eat his flesh, and so acquire
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
his strength and courage.<note place='foot'>Magyar, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Süd-Afrika in
den Jahren</hi> 1849-1857, pp. 273-276.</note> The Basutos cut off pieces
of their slain enemies and make them into a powder,
<q>which is supposed to communicate to them the courage,
skill, and good fortune of their adversaries.</q><note place='foot'>Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, p. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Zulus think that by eating the centre of the forehead
and the eyebrow of an enemy they acquire the
power of looking steadfastly at a foe.<note place='foot'>Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Nursery Tales, Traditions
and Histories of the Zulus</hi>, p. 163 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> In the Shire
Highlands of Africa those who kill a brave man eat
his heart to get his courage.<note place='foot'>John Buchanan, <hi rend='italic'>The Shire Highlands</hi>,
p. 138.</note> For the same purpose
the Chinese eat the bile of notorious bandits who have
been executed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal of the North China Branch
Royal Asiatic Society, l.c.</hi></note> In New Zealand <q>the chief was an
atua [god], but there were powerful and powerless
gods; each naturally sought to make himself one of
the former; the plan therefore adopted was to incorporate
the spirits of others with their own; thus, when
a warrior slew a chief he immediately gouged out his
eyes and swallowed them, the <foreign rend='italic'>atua tonga</foreign>, or divinity,
being supposed to reside in that organ; thus he not
only killed the body, but also possessed himself of the
soul of his enemy, and consequently the more chiefs
he slew the greater did his divinity become.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or New
Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi> (London,
1870), p. 352. Cp. <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p. 173; Ellis,
<hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, i. 358; J.
Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour du
Monde sur la corvette Astrolabe</hi>, ii.
547; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthrop. Inst.</hi>
xix. 108.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is now easy to understand why a savage should
desire to partake of the flesh of an animal or man
whom he regards as divine. By eating the body of
the god he shares in the god's attributes and powers.
And when the god is a corn-god, the corn is his proper
body; when he is a vine-god, the juice of the grape is
his blood; and so by eating the bread and drinking
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
the wine the worshipper partakes of the real body and
blood of his god. Thus the drinking of wine in the
rites of a vine-god like Dionysus is not an act of
revelry, it is a solemn sacrament.<note place='foot'>On the custom of eating a god, see
also a paper by Felix Liebrecht, <q>Der
aufgegessene Gott,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>,
pp. 436-439; and especially W. R.
Smith, art. <q>Sacrifice,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Encycl. Britann.</hi>
9th ed. vol. xxi. p. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On
wine as the blood of a god, see above,
vol. i. p. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='12. Killing the divine animal.'/>
<head>§ 12.&mdash;Killing the divine animal.</head>

<p>
It remains to show that hunting and pastoral tribes,
as well as agricultural peoples, have been in the habit
of killing their gods. The gods whom hunters and
shepherds adore and kill are animals pure and simple,
not animals regarded as embodiments of other supernatural
beings. Our first example is drawn from the
Indians of California, who, living in a fertile country<note place='foot'>This does not refer to the Californian
peninsula, which is an arid and
treeless wilderness of rock and sand.</note>
under a serene and temperate sky, nevertheless rank
near the bottom of the savage scale. The Acagchemen
tribe of San Juan Capistrano adored the great buzzard.
Once a year, at a great festival called <foreign rend='italic'>Panes</foreign> or bird-feast,
they carried one of these birds in procession
to their chief temple, which seems to have been merely
an unroofed enclosure of stakes. Here they killed the
bird without losing a drop of its blood. The skin was
removed entire and preserved with the feathers as a
relic or for the purpose of making the festal garment
or <foreign rend='italic'>paelt</foreign>. The carcass was buried in a hole in the
temple, and the old women gathered round the grave
weeping and moaning bitterly, while they threw various
kinds of seeds or pieces of food on it, crying out, <q>Why
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
did you run away? Would you not have been better
with us?</q> and so on. They said that the Panes was
a woman who had run off to the mountains and there
been changed into a bird by the god Chinigchinich.
They believed that though they sacrificed the bird
annually, she came to life again and returned to her
home in the mountains. Moreover they thought that
<q>as often as the bird was killed, it became multiplied;
because every year all the different Capitanes celebrated
the same feast of the Panes, and were firm in the
opinion that the birds sacrificed were but one and the
same female.</q><note place='foot'>Boscana, in Alfred Robinson's <hi rend='italic'>Life
in California</hi> (New York, 1846), p.
291 sq.; Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi>, iii. 168.</note>
</p>

<p>
The unity in multiplicity thus postulated by the
Californians is very noticeable and helps to explain
their motive for killing the divine bird. The notion of
the life of a species as distinct from that of an individual,
easy and obvious as it seems to us, appears to be one
which the Californian savage cannot grasp. He is
unable to conceive the life of the species otherwise
than as an individual life, and therefore as exposed to
the same dangers and calamities which menace and
finally destroy the life of the individual. Apparently
he thinks that a species left to itself will grow old and
die like an individual, and that therefore some step
must be taken to save from extinction the particular
species which he regards as divine. The only means
he can think of to avert the catastrophe is to kill a
member of the species in whose veins the tide of life is
still running strong and has not yet stagnated among
the fens of old age. The life thus diverted from one
channel will flow, he fancies, more freshly and freely
in a new one; in other words, the slain animal will
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
revive and enter on a new term of life with all the
spring and energy of youth. To us this reasoning is
transparently absurd, but so too is the custom. If a
better explanation, that is, one more consonant with
the facts and with the principles of savage thought,
can be given of the custom, I will willingly withdraw
the one here proposed. A similar confusion, it may be
noted, between the individual life and the life of the
species was made by the Samoans. Each family had
for its god a particular species of animal; yet the
death of one of these animals, for example an owl, was
not the death of the god, <q>he was supposed to be yet
alive, and incarnate in all the owls in existence.</q><note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 21, cp. pp. 26, 61.</note>
</p>

<p>
The rude Californian rite which we have just
considered has a close parallel in the religion of ancient
Egypt. The Thebans and all other Egyptians who
worshipped the Theban god Ammon held rams to be
sacred and would not sacrifice them. But once a year
at the festival of Ammon they killed a ram, skinned it,
and clothed the image of the god in the skin. Then
they mourned over the ram and buried it in a sacred
tomb. The custom was explained by a story that
Zeus had once exhibited himself to Hercules clad in
the fleece and wearing the head of a ram.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 42. The custom
has been already referred to, above,
p. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>.</note> Of course
the ram in this case was simply the beast-god of
Thebes, as the wolf was the beast-god of Lycopolis,
and the goat was the beast-god of Mendes. In
other words, the ram was Ammon himself. On the
monuments, it is true, Ammon appears in semi-human
form with the body of a man and the head of
a ram.<note place='foot'>Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,
i. § 58. Cp. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>,
iii. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (ed. 1878).</note> But this only shows that he was in the usual
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
chrysalis state through which beast-gods regularly pass
before they emerge as full-fledged anthropomorphic
gods. The ram, therefore, was killed, not as a
sacrifice to Ammon, but as the god himself, whose
identity with the beast is plainly shown by the custom
of clothing his image in the skin of the slain ram.
The reason for thus killing the ram-god annually may
have been that which I have assigned for the general
custom of killing the god and for the special Californian
custom of killing the divine buzzard. As
applied to Egypt, this explanation is supported by
the analogy of the bull-god Apis, who was not suffered
to outlive a certain term of years.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The intention of
thus putting a limit to the life of the god was, as I
have argued, to secure him from the weakness and
frailty of age. The same reasoning would explain the
custom&mdash;probably an older one&mdash;of putting the beast-god
to death annually, as was done with the ram of
Thebes.
</p>

<p>
One point in the Theban ritual&mdash;the application
of the skin to the image of the god&mdash;deserves
special attention. If the god was at first the
living ram, his representation by an image must
have originated later. But how did it originate?
The answer to this question is perhaps furnished by
the practice of preserving the skin of the animal which
is slain as divine. The Californians, as we have seen,
preserved the skin of the buzzard; and the skin of the
goat, which is killed on the harvest-field as a representative
of the corn-spirit, is kept for various superstitious
purposes.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The skin in fact was kept as a
token or memorial of the god, or rather as containing
in it a part of the divine life, and it had only to be
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
stuffed or stretched upon a frame to become a regular
image of him. At first an image of this kind would
be renewed annually,<note place='foot'>The Italmens of Kamtchatka, at
the close of the fishing season, used to
make the figure of a wolf out of grass.
This figure they carefully kept the
whole year, believing that it wedded
with their maidens and prevented them
from giving birth to twins; for twins
were esteemed a great misfortune.
Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von dem Lande
Kamtschatka</hi>, p. 327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According
to Hartknoch (<hi rend='italic'>Dissertat. histor. de
variis rebus Prussicis</hi>, p. 163; <hi rend='italic'>Altpreussen</hi>,
p. 161) the image of the old
Prussian god Curcho was annually renewed.
But see Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 27.</note> the new image being provided
by the skin of the slain animal. But from annual
images to permanent images the transition is easy.
We have seen that the older custom of cutting a
new May-tree every year was superseded by the
practice of maintaining a permanent May-pole, which
was, however, annually decked with fresh leaves and
flowers and even surmounted each year by a fresh
young tree.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 81.</note> Similarly when the stuffed skin, as a
representative of the god, was replaced by a permanent
image of him in wood, stone, or metal, the permanent
image was annually clad in the fresh skin of the slain
animal. When this stage had been reached, the
custom of killing the ram came naturally to be interpreted
as a sacrifice offered to the image, and was
explained by a story like that of Ammon and
Hercules.
</p>

<p>
West Africa furnishes another example of the
annual killing of a sacred animal and the preservation
of its skin. The negroes of Issapoo, in the island of
Fernando Po, regard the cobra-capella as their
guardian deity, who can do them good or ill, bestow
riches or inflict disease and death. The skin of one of
these reptiles is hung tail downwards from a branch of
the highest tree in the public square, and the placing
of it on the tree is an annual ceremony. As soon as
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
the ceremony is over, all children born within the past
year are carried out and their hands made to touch the
tail of the serpent's skin.<note place='foot'>T. J. Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>Impressions of
Western Africa</hi> (London, 1858), p.
196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer does not expressly
state that a serpent is killed annually,
but his statement implies it.</note> The latter custom is clearly
a way of placing the infants under the protection of
the tribal god. Similarly in Senegambia a python is
expected to visit every child of the Python clan within
eight days after birth;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, iii. 397.</note> and the Psylli, a Snake clan
of ancient Africa, used to expose their infants to
snakes in the belief that the snakes would not harm
true-born children of the clan.<note place='foot'>Varro in Priscian, x. 32, vol. i.
p. 524, ed. Keil; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> vii.
§ 14. Pliny's statement is to be corrected
by Varro's.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the Californian, Egyptian, and Fernando Po
customs the animal slain probably is, or once was, a
totem. At all events, in all three cases the worship of
the animal seems to have no relation to agriculture,
and may therefore be presumed to date from the
hunter or pastoral stage of society. The same may be
said of the following custom, though the people who
practise it&mdash;the Zuni Indians of New Mexico&mdash;are
now settled in walled villages or towns of a peculiar
type, and practise agriculture and the arts of pottery
and weaving. But the Zuni custom is marked by
certain features which appear to place it in a somewhat
different category from the preceding cases. It
may be well therefore to describe it at full length in
the words of an eye-witness.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>With midsummer the heat became intense. My
brother [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> adopted Indian brother] and I sat, day
after day, in the cool under-rooms of our house,&mdash;the
latter [<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>] busy with his quaint forge and crude appliances,
working Mexican coins over into bangles,
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
girdles, ear-rings, buttons, and what not for savage
ornament.... One day as I sat watching him, a
procession of fifty men went hastily down the hill, and
off westward over the plain. They were solemnly led
by a painted and shell-bedecked priest, and followed
by the torch-bearing Shu-lu-wit-si, or God of Fire.
After they had vanished, I asked old brother what it
all meant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>They are going,</q> said he, <q>to the city of the
Ka-ka and the home of our others.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Four days after, toward sunset, costumed and
masked in the beautiful paraphernalia of the Ka-k'ok-shi,
or <q>Good Dance,</q> they returned in file up the
same pathway, each bearing in his arms a basket filled
with living, squirming turtles, which he regarded and
carried as tenderly as a mother would her infant.
Some of the wretched reptiles were carefully wrapped
in soft blankets, their heads and forefeet protruding,&mdash;and,
mounted on the backs of the plume-bedecked
pilgrims, made ludicrous but solemn caricatures of
little children in the same position. While I was at
supper upstairs that evening, the governor's brother-in-law
came in. He was welcomed by the family as
if a messenger from heaven. He bore in his tremulous
fingers one of the much abused and rebellious turtles.
Paint still adhered to his hands and bare feet, which
led me to infer that he had formed one of the sacred
embassy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>So you went to Ka-thlu-el-lon, did you?</q> I
asked.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>E'e,</q> replied the weary man, in a voice husky
with long chanting, as he sank, almost exhausted, on a
roll of skins which had been placed for him, and
tenderly laid the turtle on the floor. No sooner did
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
the creature find itself at liberty than it made off as
fast as its lame legs would take it. Of one accord the
family forsook dish, spoon, and drinking-cup, and
grabbing from a sacred meal-bowl whole handfuls of
the contents, hurriedly followed the turtle about the
room, into dark corners, around water-jars, behind the
grinding-troughs, and out into the middle of the floor
again, praying and scattering meal on its back as they
went. At last, strange to say, it approached the footsore
man who had brought it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Ha!</q> he exclaimed, with emotion; <q>see, it comes
to me again; ah, what great favours the fathers of all
grant me this day,</q> and passing his hand gently over
the sprawling animal, he inhaled from his palm deeply
and long, at the same time invoking the favour of the
gods. Then he leaned his chin upon his hand, and
with large wistful eyes regarded his ugly captive as
it sprawled about, blinking its meal-bedimmed eyes,
and clawing the smooth floor in memory of its native
element. At this juncture I ventured a question:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Why do you not let him go, or give him some
water?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Slowly the man turned his eyes toward me, an
odd mixture of pain, indignation, and pity on his face,
while the worshipful family stared at me with holy
horror.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Poor younger brother!</q> he said at last, <q>know
you not how precious it is? It die? It will <emph>not</emph> die;
I tell you, it cannot die.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>But it will die if you don't feed it and give it
water.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>I tell you it <emph>cannot</emph> die; it will only change
houses to-morrow, and go back to the home of its
brothers. Ah, well! How should <emph>you</emph> know?</q> he
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
mused. Turning to the blinded turtle again: <q>Ah!
my poor dear lost child or parent, my sister or brother
to have been! Who knows which? Maybe my own
great-grandfather or mother!</q> And with this he fell to
weeping most pathetically, and, tremulous with sobs,
which were echoed by the women and children, he
buried his face in his hands. Filled with sympathy
for his grief, however mistaken, I raised the turtle to
my lips and kissed its cold shell; then depositing it on
the floor, hastily left the grief-stricken family to their
sorrows. Next day, with prayers and tender beseechings,
plumes, and offerings, the poor turtle was killed,
and its flesh and bones were removed and deposited
in the little river, that it might <q>return once more to
eternal life among its comrades in the dark waters of
the lake of the dead.</q> The shell, carefully scraped and
dried, was made into a dance-rattle, and, covered by a
piece of buckskin, it still hangs from the smoke-stained
rafters of my brother's house. Once a Navajo tried
to buy it for a ladle; loaded with indignant reproaches,
he was turned out of the house. Were any one to
venture the suggestion that the turtle no longer lived,
his remark would cause a flood of tears, and he would
be reminded that it had only <q>changed houses and
gone to live for ever in the home of <q>our lost
others.</q></q></q><note place='foot'>Mr. Frank H. Cushing, <q>My
Adventures in Zuñi,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>The Century</hi>,
May 1883, p. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In this custom we find expressed in the clearest
way a belief in the transmigration of human souls into
the bodies of turtles.<note place='foot'>Mr. Cushing, indeed, while he
admits that the ancestors of the Zuni
may have believed in transmigration,
says, <q>Their belief, to-day, however,
relative to the future life is spiritualistic.</q>
But the expressions in the text
seem to leave no room for doubting
that the transmigration into turtles is a
living article of Zuni faith.</note> The same belief in transmigration
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
is held by the Moqui Indians, who belong to the
same race as the Zunis. The Moquis are divided into
totem clans&mdash;the Bear clan, Deer clan, Wolf clan,
Hare clan, etc.; they believe that the ancestors of the
clans were bears, deer, wolves, hares, etc.; and that at
death the members of each clan become bears, deer,
etc.<note place='foot'>Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, iv. 86.
On the totem clans of the Moquis, see J.
G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>Snake-Dance of the Moquis
of Arizona</hi>, pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 334 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Zuni are also divided into clans, the totems
of which agree closely with those of the Moquis, and
one of their totems is the turtle.<note place='foot'>For this information I am indebted
to the kindness of Captain J. G. Bourke,
3d. Cavalry, U.S. Army, author of the
work mentioned in the preceding note.</note> Thus their belief in
transmigration into the turtle is probably one of the
regular articles of their totem faith. What then is the
meaning of killing a turtle in which the soul of a kinsman
is believed to be present? Apparently the object
is to keep up a communication with the other world in
which the souls of the departed are believed to be
assembled in the form of turtles. It is a common
belief that the spirits of the dead return occasionally to
their old homes; and accordingly the unseen visitors
are welcomed and feasted by the living, and then sent
upon their way.<note place='foot'>The old Prussian and Japanese
customs are typical. For the former,
see above, vol. i. p. 177. For the
latter, Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire et Description
générale du Japon</hi>, i, 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Thunberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages au Japon</hi>, etc. iv. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
A general account of such customs must
be reserved for another work.</note> In the Zuni ceremony the dead are
fetched back in the form of turtles, and the killing of
the turtles is the way of sending back the souls to the
spirit-land. Thus the general explanation given above
of the custom of killing a god seems inapplicable to
the Zuni custom, the true meaning of which is somewhat
obscure.
</p>

<p>
Doubt also hangs over the meaning of the bear-sacrifice
offered by the Ainos, a primitive people
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
who are found in the Japanese islands of Yesso and
Saghalien, and also in the southern of the Kurile
Islands. It is not quite easy to make out the attitude
of the Ainos towards the bear. On the one hand
they give it the name of <foreign rend='italic'>Kamui</foreign> or <q>god</q>; but
as they apply the same word to strangers,<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <q>Der Baerencultus
und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der deutschen Gesellschaft
b. S. und S. Ostasiens</hi> (Yokama), Heft
xxii. p. 45.</note> it probably
means no more than a being supposed to be endowed
with superhuman powers. Again, it is said <q>the bear
is their chief divinity;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society</hi>, iv. 36.</note> <q>in the religion of the Ainos
the bear plays a chief part;</q><note place='foot'>Rein, <hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>, i. 446.</note> <q>amongst the animals
it is especially the bear which receives an idolatrous
veneration;</q><note place='foot'>H. von Siebold, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnologische Studien
über die Ainos auf der Insel
Yesso</hi>, p. 26.</note> <q>they worship it after their fashion....
There is no doubt that this wild beast
inspires more of the feeling which prompts worship
than the inanimate forces of nature, and the Ainos
may be distinguished as bear-worshippers.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Bird, <hi rend='italic'>Unbeaten Tracks in
Japan</hi> (new ed. 1885), p. 275.</note> Yet,
on the other hand, they kill the bear whenever they
can;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Trans. Ethnol. Soc.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> <q>the men spend the autumn, winter, and
spring in hunting deer and bears. Part of their
tribute or taxes is paid in skins, and they subsist
on the dried meat;</q><note place='foot'>Miss Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 269.</note> bear's flesh is indeed one of
their staple foods; they eat it both fresh and salted;<note place='foot'>Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 4.</note>
and the skins of bears furnish them with clothing.<note place='foot'>Scheube, <q>Baerencultus,</q> etc. p.
45; Joest, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen d. Berliner
Gesell. f. Anthropologie</hi>, 1882, p. 188.</note>
In fact, the <q>worship</q> of which writers on this subject
speak appears to be paid only to the dead animal.
Thus, although they kill a bear whenever they can,
<q>in the process of dissecting the carcass they
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
endeavour to conciliate the deity, whose representative
they have slain, by making elaborate obeisances
and deprecatory salutations;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Trans. Ethnol. Soc. l.c.</hi></note> <q>when a bear is
trapped or wounded by an arrow, the hunters go
through an apologetic or propitiatory ceremony.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 277.</note>
The skulls of slain bears receive a place of honour
in their huts, or are set up on sacred posts outside
the huts, and are treated with much respect; libations
of <foreign rend='italic'>sake</foreign>, an intoxicating liquor, are offered to them.<note place='foot'>Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 15; Siebold,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 26; <hi rend='italic'>Trans. Ethnol.
Soc.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Rein, <hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>, i. 447; Von
Brandt, <q>The Ainos and Japanese,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> iii. 134;
Miss Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 275, 276.</note>
The skulls of foxes are also fastened to the sacred
posts outside the huts; they are regarded as charms
against evil spirits, and are consulted as oracles.<note place='foot'>Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, pp. 15, 16;
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> iii. 134.</note>
Yet it is expressly said, <q>The live fox is revered
just as little as the bear; rather they avoid it as
much as possible, considering it a wily animal.</q><note place='foot'>Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 16.</note>
The bear cannot, therefore, be described as a sacred
animal of the Ainos, and it certainly is not a totem;
for they do not call themselves bears, they appear
to have no legend of their descent from a bear,<note place='foot'>Reclus (<hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</hi>,
vii. 755) mentions a (Japanese?)
legend which attributes the hairiness of
the Ainos to the fact of their first
ancestor having been suckled by a
bear. But in the absence of other
evidence this is no proof of totemism.</note>
and they kill and eat the animal freely.
</p>

<p>
But it is the bear-festival of the Ainos which concerns
us here. Towards the end of winter a young
bear is caught and brought into the village. At first
he is suckled by an Aino woman; afterwards he is
fed on fish. When he grows so strong that he
threatens to break out of the wooden cage in which
he is confined, the feast is held. But <q>it is a peculiarly
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
striking fact that the young bear is not kept merely to
furnish a good meal; rather he is regarded and
honoured as a fetish, or even as a sort of higher
being.</q><note place='foot'>Rein, <hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>, i. 447.</note> The festival is generally celebrated in
September or October. Before it takes place the
Ainos apologise to their gods, alleging that they
have treated the bear kindly as long as they could,
now they can feed him no longer, and are obliged
to kill him. A man who gives a bear-feast invites
his relations and friends; in a small village nearly
the whole community takes part in the feast. One
of these festivals has been described by an eyewitness,
Dr. Scheube.<note place='foot'><q>Der Baerencultus,</q> etc. See above.</note> On entering the hut he
found about thirty Ainos present, men, women, and
children, all dressed in their best. The master of
the house first offered a libation on the fireplace to the
god of the fire, and the guests followed his example.
Then a libation was offered to the house-god in his
sacred corner of the hut. Meanwhile the housewife,
who had nursed the bear, sat by herself, silent and
sad, bursting now and then into tears. Her grief
was obviously unaffected, and it deepened as the
festival went on. Next, the master of the house
and some of the guests went out of the hut and
offered libations before the bear's cage. A few
drops were presented to the bear in a saucer, which
he at once upset. Then the women and girls
danced round the cage, their faces turned towards
it, their knees slightly bent, rising and hopping on
their toes. As they danced they clapped their hands
and sang a monotonous song. The housewife and
a few old women, who might have nursed many
bears, danced tearfully, stretching out their arms to
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
the bear, and addressing it in terms of endearment.
The young folks were less affected; they laughed
as well as sang. Disturbed by the noise, the bear
began to rush about his cage and howl lamentably.
Next libations were offered to the <foreign rend='italic'>inabos</foreign> or sacred
wands which stand outside of an Aino hut. These
wands are about a couple of feet high, and are
whittled at the top into spiral shavings.<note place='foot'>Scheube, <q>Baerencultus,</q> etc. p. 46; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 15; Miss Bird,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Five new
wands with bamboo leaves attached to them had
been set up for the festival. This is regularly done
when a bear is killed; the leaves mean that the
bear may come to life again. Then the bear was
let out of his cage, a rope was thrown round his
neck, and he was led about in the neighbourhood
of the hut. While this was being done the men,
headed by a chief, shot at the bear with arrows
tipped with wooden buttons. Dr. Scheube had to
do so also. Then the bear was taken before the
sacred wands, a stick was put in his mouth, nine
men knelt on him and pressed his neck against a
beam. In five minutes the bear had expired without
uttering a sound. Meantime the women and girls
had taken post behind the men, where they danced,
lamenting, and beating the men who were killing
the bear. The bear's carcass was next placed on
a mat before the sacred wands; and a sword and
quiver, taken from the wands, were hung round the
beast's neck. Being a she-bear, it was also adorned
with a necklace and ear-rings. Then food and drink
were offered to it, in the shape of millet-broth, millet-cakes,
and a pot of <foreign rend='italic'>sake</foreign>. The men now sat down
on mats before the dead bear, offered libations to
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
it, and drank deep. Meanwhile the women and
girls had laid aside all marks of sorrow, and danced
merrily, none more merrily than the old women.
When the mirth was at its height two young Ainos,
who had let the bear out of his cage, mounted the
roof of the hut and threw cakes of millet among
the company, who all scrambled for them without
distinction of age or sex. The bear was next skinned
and disembowelled, and the trunk severed from the
head, to which the skin was left hanging. The blood,
caught in cups, was eagerly swallowed by the men.
None of the women or children appeared to drink
the blood, though custom did not forbid them to
do so. The liver was cut in small pieces and eaten
raw, with salt, the women and children getting their
share. The flesh and the rest of the vitals were
taken into the house to be kept till the next day
but one, and then to be divided among the persons
who had been present at the feast. Blood and
liver were offered to Dr. Scheube. While the bear
was being disembowelled, the women and girls danced
the same dance which they had danced at the beginning&mdash;not,
however, round the cage, but in front
of the sacred wands. At this dance the old women,
who had been merry a moment before, again shed
tears freely. After the brain had been extracted
from the bear's head and swallowed with salt, the
skull, detached from the skin, was hung on a pole
beside the sacred wands. The stick with which
the bear had been gagged was also fastened to the
pole, and so were the sword and quiver which had
been hung on the carcass. The latter were removed
in about an hour, but the rest remained standing.
The whole company, men and women, danced noisily
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
before the pole; and another drinking-bout, in which
the women joined, closed the festival.
</p>

<p>
The mode of killing the bear is described somewhat
differently by Miss Bird, who, however, did
not witness the ceremony. She says: <q>Yells and
shouts are used to excite the bear; and when he
becomes much agitated a chief shoots him with an
arrow, inflicting a slight wound which maddens him,
on which the bars of the cage are raised, and
he springs forth, very furious. At this stage the
Ainos run upon him with various weapons, each
one striving to inflict a wound, as it brings good
luck to draw his blood. As soon as he falls down
exhausted his head is cut off, and the weapons
with which he has been wounded are offered to it,
and he is asked to avenge himself upon them.</q> At
Usu, on Volcano Bay, when the bear is being killed,
the Ainos shout, <q>We kill you, O bear! come back
soon into an Aino.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Miss
Bird's information must be received with
caution, as there are grounds for believing
that her informant deceived her.</note> A very respectable authority, Dr.
Siebold, states that the bear's own heart is frequently
offered to the dead animal, in order to assure him
that he is still in life.<note place='foot'>Siebold, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnolog. Studien über
die Ainos</hi>, p. 26.</note> This, however, is denied by
Dr. Scheube, who says the heart is eaten.<note place='foot'><q>Baerencultus,</q> etc. p. 50 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> Perhaps
the custom may be observed in some places, though
not in others.
</p>

<p>
The Gilyaks, a Tunguzian people of Eastern
Siberia,<note place='foot'>They inhabit the banks of the
lower Amoor and the north of Saghalien.
E. G. Ravenstein, <hi rend='italic'>The Russians
on the Amur</hi>, p. 389.</note> hold a bear festival of the same sort. <q>The
bear is the object of the most refined solicitude of an
entire village and plays the chief part in their religious
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
ceremonies.</q><note place='foot'><q>Notes on the River Amur and
the adjacent districts,</q> translated from
the Russian, <hi rend='italic'>Journal Royal Geogr.
Soc.</hi> xxviii. (1858) p. 396.</note> An old she-bear is shot and her cub is
reared, but not suckled in the village. When the bear
is big enough he is taken from his cage and dragged
through the village. But first he is led to the bank of
the river, for this is believed to ensure abundance of
fish to each family. He is then taken into every house
in the village, where fish, brandy, etc. are offered to
him. Some people prostrate themselves before the
beast. His entrance into a house is supposed to bring
a blessing; and if he snuffs at the food offered to him,
this also is a blessing. Nevertheless they tease and
worry, poke and tickle the animal continually, so that
he is surly and snappish.<note place='foot'>Compare the custom of pinching the
frog before cutting off his head, above
vol. i. p. 93. In Japan sorceresses
bury a dog in the earth, tease him,
then cut off his head and put it in a
box to be used in magic. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Culturländer des alten Amerika</hi>, i. 475
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, who adds <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>wie im ostindischen
Archipelago die Schutzseele gereizt wird</foreign>.</q>
He probably refers to the Batta <foreign rend='italic'>Pang-hulu-balang</foreign>.
See Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische Archipel</hi>, p. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W.
Ködding, <q>Die Batakschen Götter,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>, xii.
(1885) 478 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Neumann, <q>Het Pane-en
Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland
Sumatra,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift v. h. Nederl.
Aardrijks Genootsch</hi>. ii. series, dl. iii.
Afdeeling: meer uitgebreide artikelen,
No. 2, p. 306.</note> After being thus taken
to every house, he is tied to a peg and shot dead with
arrows. His head is then cut off, decked with shavings,
and placed on the table where the feast is set out.
Here they beg pardon of the beast and worship him.
Then his flesh is roasted and eaten in special vessels of
wood finely carved. They do not eat the flesh raw
nor drink the blood, as the Ainos do. The brain and
entrails are eaten last; and the skull, still decked
with shavings, is placed on a tree near the house.
Then the people sing and both sexes dance in ranks,
as bears.<note place='foot'>W. Joest, in Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>,
p. 17; <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, ii. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(on the authority of Mr. Seeland); <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnologie</hi>, i.
102 (on the authority of Captain
Jacobsen). What exactly is meant by
<q>dancing as bears</q> (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>tanzen beide
Geschlechter Reigentänze, wie Bären</foreign>,</q>
Joest, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>) does not appear.</note>
</p>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p>
The Goldi, neighbours of the Gilyaks, treat the
bear in much the same way. They hunt and kill it;
but sometimes they capture a live bear and keep him
in a cage, feeding him well and calling him their son
and brother. Then at a great festival he is taken
from his cage, paraded about with marked consideration,
and afterwards killed and eaten. <q>The skull,
jaw-bones, and ears are then suspended on a tree, as
an antidote against evil spirits; but the flesh is eaten
and much relished, for they believe that all who partake
of it acquire a zest for the chase, and become
courageous.</q><note place='foot'>Ravenstein, <hi rend='italic'>The Russians on the
Amur</hi>, p. 379 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; T. W. Atkinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels in the Regions of the Upper and
Lower Amoor</hi> (London, 1860), p. 482
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the treatment of the captive bear by these
tribes there are features which can hardly be distinguished
from worship. Such in particular is the
Gilyak custom of leading him from house to house,
that every family may receive his blessing&mdash;a custom
parallel to the European one of taking a May-tree or
a personal representative of the tree-spirit from door
to door in spring, in order that all may share the fresh
energies of reviving nature. Again the expected
resurrection of the bear is avowedly indicated by the
bamboo leaves and by the prayer addressed to him to
<q>come back soon into an Aino.</q> And that the eating
of his flesh is regarded as a sacrament is made
probable by the Gilyak custom of reserving special
vessels to hold the bear's flesh on this solemn occasion.
How is the reverence thus paid to particular bears to
be reconciled with the fact that bears in general are
habitually hunted and killed by these tribes for the
sake of their flesh and skins? On the one hand, the
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
bear is treated as a god; on the other hand, as a
creature wholly subservient to human needs. The
apparent contradiction vanishes when we place ourselves
at the savage point of view. The savage, we
must remember, believes that animals are endowed
with feelings and intelligence like those of men, and
that, like men, they possess souls which survive the
death of their bodies either to wander about as
disembodied spirits or to be born again in animal
form. To the savage, therefore, who regards all
living creatures as practically on a footing of equality
with man,<note place='foot'>A Bushman, questioned by the
Rev. Mr. Campbell, <q>could not state
any difference between a man and a
brute&mdash;he did not know but a buffalo
might shoot with bows and arrows as
well as a man, if it had them.</q> John
Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South Africa,
being a Narrative of a Second Journey
in the Interior of that Country</hi>, ii. 34.
When the Russians first landed on one
of the Alaskan islands the people took
them for cuttle-fish, <q>on account of
the buttons on their clothes.</q> Petroff,
<hi rend='italic'>Alaska</hi>, p. 145.</note> the act of killing and eating an animal must
wear a very different aspect from that which the same
act presents to us who regard the intelligence of
animals as far inferior to our own and deny them the
possession of immortal souls. Thus on the principles
of his rude philosophy the savage who slays an animal
believes himself exposed to the vengeance either of
its disembodied spirit or of all the other animals of the
same species, whom he considers as knit together, like
men, by the ties of kin and the obligations of the blood
feud, and therefore as bound to resent the injury done
to one of their number. Accordingly the savage
makes it a rule to spare the life of those animals which
he has no pressing motive for killing, at least such
fierce and dangerous animals as are likely to exact a
bloody vengeance for the slaughter of one of their
kind. Crocodiles are animals of this sort. They are
only found in hot countries where, as a rule, food is
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
abundant and primitive man has therefore no reason to
kill them for the sake of their tough and unpalatable
flesh. Hence it is a general rule among savages to
spare crocodiles, or rather only to kill them in
obedience to the law of blood feud, that is, as a
retaliation for the slaughter of men by crocodiles. For
example, the Dyaks of Borneo will not kill a crocodile
unless a crocodile has first killed a man. <q>For why,
say they, should they commit an act of aggression,
when he and his kindred can so easily repay them?
But should the alligator take a human life, revenge
becomes a sacred duty of the living relatives, who will
trap the man-eater in the spirit of an officer of justice
pursuing a criminal. Others, even then, hang back,
reluctant to embroil themselves in a quarrel which
does not concern them. The man-eating alligator is
supposed to be pursued by a righteous Nemesis; and
whenever one is caught they have a profound conviction
that it must be the guilty one, or his accomplice.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Perham, <q>Sea Dyak
Religion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 10, p.
221. Cp. C. Hupe, <q>Korte verhandeling
over de godsdienst zeden,
enz. der Dajakkers,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neêrland's Indië</hi>, 1846, dl. iii.
160; S. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Reizen en onderzoekingen
in den Indischen Archipel</hi>, i.
238; Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Beschrijving
der Dayaks</hi>, p. 7.</note>
So the natives of Madagascar never kill a crocodile
<q>except in retaliation for one of their friends who has
been destroyed by a crocodile. They believe that the
wanton destruction of one of these reptiles will be
followed by the loss of human life, in accordance with
the principle of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lex talionis</foreign>.</q> The people who live
near the lake Itasy in Madagascar make a yearly
proclamation to the crocodiles, announcing that they
will revenge the death of some of their friends by
killing as many crocodiles in return and warning all
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
well-disposed crocodiles to keep out of the way, as
they have no quarrel with them, but only with their
evil-minded relations who have taken human life.<note place='foot'>Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African Island</hi>,
p. 269.</note>
The Foulahs of Senegambia respect crocodiles on
similar grounds.<note place='foot'>Raffenel, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Afrique
Occidentale</hi> (Paris, 1846), p. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Seminoles, Sioux, and Iowa
Indians of North America spare the rattle-snake
because they fear that the ghost of the dead rattle-snake
would incite its kinsfolk to take vengeance.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, v. 65.</note>
No consideration will induce a Sumatran to catch or
wound a tiger except in self-defence or immediately
after the tiger has destroyed a friend or relation.
When a European has set traps for tigers, the people
of the neighbourhood have been known to go by night
to the place and explain to the tiger that the traps are
not set by them nor with their consent.<note place='foot'>Marsden, <hi rend='italic'>History of Sumatra</hi>, p.
292.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the savage clearly cannot afford to spare all
animals. He must either eat some of them or starve,
and when the question thus comes to be whether he or
the animal must perish, he is forced to overcome his
superstitious scruples and take the life of the beast.
At the same time he does all he can to appease his
victims and their kinsfolk. Even in the act of killing
them he testifies his respect for them, endeavours to
excuse or even conceal his share in procuring their
death, and promises that their remains will be honourably
treated. By thus robbing death of its terrors he
hopes to reconcile his victims to their fate and to
induce their fellows to come and be killed also. For
example, it was a principle with the Kamtchatkans
never to kill a land or sea animal without first making
excuses to it and begging that the animal would not
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
take it ill. Also they offered it cedar-nuts, etc. to
make it think that it was not a victim but a guest at a
feast. They believed that this prevented other animals
of the same species from growing shy. For instance,
after they had killed a bear and feasted on its flesh, the
host would bring the bear's head before the company,
wrap it in grass, and present it with a variety of trifles.
Then he would lay the blame of the bear's death on
the Russians, and bid the beast wreak his wrath upon
them. Also he would ask the bear to tell the other
bears how well he had been treated, that they too
might come without fear. Seals, sea-lions, and other
animals were treated by the Kamtchatkans with the
same ceremonious respect.<note place='foot'>Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von dem
Lande Kamtschatka</hi>, pp. 280, 331.</note> When the Ostiaks have
hunted and killed a bear, they cut off its head and
hang it on a tree. Then they gather round in a circle
and pay it divine honours. Next they run towards
the carcass uttering lamentations and saying, <q>Who
killed you? It was the Russians. Who cut off your
head? It was a Russian axe. Who skinned you?
It was a knife made by a Russian.</q> They explain,
too, that the feathers which sped the arrow on its
flight came from the wing of a strange bird, and that
they did nothing but let the arrow go. They do all
this because they believe that the wandering ghost of
the slain bear would attack them on the first opportunity,
if they did not thus appease it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Voyages au Nord</hi> (Amsterdam,
1727), viii. 41, 416; Pallas, <hi rend='italic'>Reise
durch verschiedene Provinzen des
russischen Reichs</hi>, iii. 64; Georgi,
<hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung aller Nationen des russischen
Reichs</hi>, p. 83.</note> Or they stuff
the skin of the slain bear with hay; and after celebrating
their victory with songs of mockery and insult,
after spitting on and kicking it, they set it up on its
hind legs, <q>and then, for a considerable time, they
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
bestow on it all the veneration due to a guardian
god.</q><note place='foot'>Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Siberia</hi>, ii. 43.
For the veneration of the polar bear by
the Samoyedes, who nevertheless kill
and eat it, see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a party of Koriaks have killed a bear
or a wolf, they skin the beast and dress one of themselves
in the skin. Then they dance round the skin-clad
man, saying that it was not they who killed the
animal, but some one else, generally a Russian. When
they kill a fox they skin it, wrap the body in grass,
and bid him go tell his companions how hospitably he
has been received, and how he has received a new
cloak instead of his old one.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der Geschichte</hi>,
iii. 26.</note> The Finns used to try to
persuade a slain bear that he had not been killed by
them, but had fallen from a tree, etc.<note place='foot'>Max Buch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wotjäken</hi>, p. 139.</note> When the
Lapps had succeeded in killing a bear with impunity,
they thanked him for not hurting them and for not
breaking the clubs and spears which had given him
his death wounds; and they prayed that he would not
visit his death upon them by sending storms or in any
other way.<note place='foot'>Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi> (Frankfort,
1673), p. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Lapps <q>have
still an elaborate ceremony in hunting
the bear. They pray and chant to his
carcase, and for several days worship
before eating it.</q> E. Rae, <hi rend='italic'>The White
Sea Peninsula</hi> (London, 1881), p.
276.</note> His flesh then furnished a feast.
</p>

<p>
The reverence of hunters for the bear whom they
regularly kill and eat may thus be traced all along the
northern region of the Old World, from Behring's
Straits to Lappland. It reappears in similar forms in
North America. With the American Indians a bear
hunt was an important event for which they prepared
by long fasts and purgations. Before setting out they
offered expiatory sacrifices to the souls of bears slain
in previous hunts, and besought them to be favourable
to the hunters. When a bear was killed the hunter
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
lit his pipe, and putting the mouth of it between the
bear's lips, blew into the bowl, filling the beast's mouth
with smoke. Then he begged the bear not to be
angry at having been killed, and not to thwart him
afterwards in the chase. The carcass was roasted
whole and eaten; not a morsel of the flesh might be
left over. The head, painted red and blue, was hung
on a post and addressed by orators, who heaped praise
on the dead beast.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, v. 173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Chateaubriand,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>, pp. 172-181
(Paris, Michel Lévy, 1870).</note> When men of the Bear clan in
the Otawa tribe killed a bear, they made him a feast
of his own flesh, and addressed him thus: <q>Cherish
us no grudge because we have killed you. You have
sense; you see that our children are hungry. They
love you and wish to take you into their bodies. Is it
not glorious to be eaten by the children of a chief?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>, vi.
171. Morgan states that the names of
the Otawa totem clans had not been
obtained (<hi rend='italic'>Ancient Society</hi>, p. 167).
From the <hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes</hi>, vi. 168-171,
he might have learned the names
of the Hare, Carp, and Bear clans, to
which may be added the Gull clan, as
I learn from an extract from <hi rend='italic'>The
Canadian Journal</hi> (Toronto) for March
1858, quoted in the <hi rend='italic'>Academy</hi>, 27th
September 1884, p. 203.</note>
Amongst the Nootka Indians of British Columbia,
when a bear had been killed, it was brought in and
seated before the head chief in an upright posture,
with a chief's bonnet, wrought in figures, on its head,
and its fur powdered over with white down. A tray
of provisions was then set before it, and it was invited
by words and gestures to eat. The animal was then
skinned, boiled, and eaten.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Narrative of the Adventures and
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</hi>, p. 117
(Middletown, 1820), p. 133 (Edinburgh,
1824).</note>
</p>

<p>
A like respect is testified for other dangerous
animals by the hunters who regularly trap and kill
them. When Kafir hunters are in the act of showering
spears on an elephant, they call out, <q>Don't kill us,
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
great captain; don't strike or tread upon us, mighty
chief.</q><note place='foot'>Stephen Kay, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches
in Caffraria</hi> (London, 1833),
p. 138.</note> When he is dead they make their excuses to
him, pretending that his death was a pure accident.
As a mark of respect they bury his trunk with much
solemn ceremony; for they say that <q>The elephant is
a great lord; his trunk is his hand.</q><note place='foot'>Alberti, <hi rend='italic'>De Kaffers aan de Zuidkust
van Afrika</hi> (Amsterdam, 1810),
p. 95. Alberti's information is repeated
by Lichtenstein (<hi rend='italic'>Reisen im südlichen
Afrika</hi>, i. 412), and by Rose (<hi rend='italic'>Four
Years in Southern Africa</hi>, p. 155). The
burial of the trunk is also mentioned by
Kay, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Amongst some
tribes of Eastern Africa, when a lion is killed, the carcass
is brought before the king, who does homage to
it by prostrating himself on the ground and rubbing
his face on the muzzle of the beast.<note place='foot'>Jerome Becker, <hi rend='italic'>La Vie en Afrique</hi>
(Paris and Brussels, 1887), ii. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
305.</note> In some parts of
Western Africa if a negro kills a leopard he is bound
fast and brought before the chiefs for having killed
one of their peers. The man defends himself on the
plea that the leopard is chief of the forest and therefore
a stranger. He is then set at liberty and rewarded.
But the dead leopard, adorned with a chief's bonnet,
is set up in the village, where nightly dances are held
in its honour.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, ii. 243.</note> <q>Before leaving a temporary camp in
the forest, where they have killed a tapir and dried
the meat on a babracot, Indians [of Guiana] invariably
destroy this babracot, saying that should a tapir passing
that way find traces of the slaughter of one of his kind,
he would come by night on the next occasion when
Indians slept at that place, and, taking a man, would
babracot him in revenge.</q><note place='foot'>Im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Indians of
Guiana</hi>, p. 352.</note>
</p>

<p>
But it is not merely dangerous animals with whom
the savage desires to keep on good terms. It is true
that the respect which he pays to wild beasts is in some
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
measure proportioned to their strength and ferocity.
Thus the savage Stiens of Cambodia, believing that
all animals have souls which roam about after their
death, beg an animal's pardon when they kill it, lest its
soul should come and torment them. Also they offer
it sacrifices, but these sacrifices are proportioned to
the size and strength of the animal. The ceremonies
observed at the death of an elephant are conducted
with much pomp and last seven days.<note place='foot'>Mouhot, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the Central
Parts of Indo-China</hi>, i. 252; Moura,
<hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>, i. 422.</note> Similar distinctions
are drawn by North American Indians.
<q>The bear, the buffalo, and the beaver are manidos
[divinities] which furnish food. The bear is formidable,
and good to eat. They render ceremonies to him,
begging him to allow himself to be eaten, although
they know he has no fancy for it. We kill you, but
you are not annihilated. His head and paws are
objects of homage.... Other animals are treated
similarly from similar reasons.... Many of the
animal manidos, not being dangerous, are often treated
with contempt&mdash;the terrapin, the weasel, polecat, etc.</q><note place='foot'>Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, v.
420.</note>
The distinction is instructive. Animals which are
feared, or are good to eat, or both, are treated with
ceremonious respect; those which are neither formidable
nor good to eat are despised. We have had
examples of reverence paid to animals which are both
feared and eaten. It remains to prove that similar
respect is shown for animals which, without being
feared, are either eaten or valued for their skins.
</p>

<p>
When Siberian sable-hunters have caught a sable,
no one is allowed to see it, and they think that if good
or evil be spoken of the captured sable, no more sables
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
will be caught. A hunter has been known to express
his belief that the sables could hear what was said
of them as far off as Moscow. He said that the chief
reason why the sable hunt was now so unproductive
was that some live sables had been sent to Moscow.
There they had been viewed with astonishment as
strange animals, and the sables cannot abide that.
Another, though minor, cause of the diminished take of
sable was, he alleged, that the world is now much
worse than it used to be, so that nowadays a hunter
will sometimes hide the sable which he has got instead
of putting it into the common stock. This also, said
he, the sables cannot abide.<note place='foot'>J. G. Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>,
ii. 278.</note> Alaskan hunters preserve
the bones of sables and beavers out of reach of the
dogs for a year and then bury them carefully, <q>lest the
spirits who look after the beavers and sables should
consider that they are regarded with contempt, and
hence no more should be killed or trapped.</q><note place='foot'>W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>,
p. 89.</note> The
Canadian Indians were equally particular not to let
their dogs gnaw the bones, or at least certain of the
bones, of beavers. They took the greatest pains to
collect and preserve these bones and, when the beaver
had been caught in a net, they threw them into the river.
To a Jesuit who argued that the beavers could not
possibly know what became of their bones, the Indians
replied, <q>You know nothing about catching beavers
and yet you will be talking about it. Before the
beaver is stone dead, his soul takes a turn in the hut
of the man who is killing him and makes a careful note
of what is done with his bones. If the bones are
given to the dogs, the other beavers would get word of
it and would not let themselves be caught. Whereas,
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
if their bones are thrown into the fire or a river, they
are quite satisfied; and it is particularly gratifying to
the net which caught them.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1634, p. 24,
ed. 1858. Nets are regarded by the
Indians as living creatures who not only
think and feel but also eat, speak, and
marry wives. Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le Grand Voyage
du Pays des Hurons</hi>, p. 256 (p. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
of the Paris reprint, Librairie Tross,
1865); S. Hearne, <hi rend='italic'>Journey to the
Northern Ocean</hi>, p. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Relations
des Jésuites</hi>, 1636, p. 109; <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 1639,
p. 95; Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la
Nouvelle France</hi>, v. 225; Chateaubriand,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>, p. 140
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Before hunting the
beaver they offered a solemn prayer to the Great
Beaver, and presented him with tobacco; and when the
chase was over, an orator pronounced a funeral oration
over the dead beavers. He praised their spirit and
wisdom. <q>You will hear no more,</q> said he, <q>the voice
of the chieftains who commanded you and whom you
chose from among all the warrior beavers to give you
laws. Your language, which the medicine-men understand
perfectly, will be heard no more at the bottom
of the lake. You will fight no more battles with the
otters, your cruel foes. No, beavers! But your skins
shall serve to buy arms; we will carry your smoked
hams to our children; we will keep the dogs from
eating your bones, which are so hard.</q><note place='foot'>Chateaubriand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>,
pp. 175, 178. They will not let
the blood of beavers fall on the ground,
or their luck in hunting them would be
gone. <hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1633, p.
21. Compare the rule about not
allowing the blood of kings to fall on
the ground, above, vol. i. p. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The elan, deer, and elk were treated by the North
American Indians with the same punctilious respect,
and for the same reason. Their bones might not
be given to the dogs nor thrown into the fire, nor
might their fat be dropped upon the fire, because the
souls of the dead animals were believed to see what
was done to their bodies and to tell it to the other
beasts, living and dead. Hence, if their bodies were
ill used, the animals of that species would not allow
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
themselves to be taken, neither in this world nor in the
world to come.<note place='foot'>Hennepin, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveau voyage d'un
pais plus grand que l'Europe</hi> (Utrecht,
1698), p. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>,
1636, p. 109; Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le Grand Voyage
du Pays des Hurons</hi>, p. 255 (p. 178 of
the Paris reprint). Not quite consistently
the Canadian Indians used to
kill every elan they could overtake in
the chase, lest any should escape to
warn their fellows (Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>)</note> A sick man would be asked by the
medicine-man whether he had not thrown away some
of the flesh of the deer or turtle, and if he answered
yes, the medicine-man would say, <q>That is what is
killing you. The soul of the deer or turtle has entered
into your body to avenge the wrong you did it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>, viii.
339.</note>
The Sioux will not stick an awl or needle into a turtle,
for they are sure that, if they were to do so, the turtle
would punish them at some future time.<note place='foot'>Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, iii. 230.</note> The
Canadian Indians would not eat the embryos of the
elk, unless at the close of the hunting season; otherwise
the mother-elks would be shy and refuse to be
caught.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1634, p. 26.</note> Some of the Indians believed that each sort
of animal had its patron or genius who watched over
and preserved it. An Indian girl having once picked
up a dead mouse, her father snatched the little creature
from her and tenderly caressed and fondled it. Being
asked why he did so, he said that it was to appease the
genius of mice, in order that he might not torment his
daughter for eating the mouse. With that he handed
the mouse to the girl and she ate it.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, v. 443.</note>
</p>

<p>
For like reasons, a tribe which depends for its
subsistence, chiefly or in part, upon fishing is careful
to treat the fish with every mark of honour and respect.
The Indians of Peru <q>adored the fish that they
caught in greatest abundance; for they said that the
first fish that was made in the world above (for so they
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
named Heaven) gave birth to all other fish of that
species, and took care to send them plenty of its
children to sustain their tribe. For this reason they
worshipped sardines in one region, where they killed
more of them than of any other fish; in others, the
skate; in others, the dogfish; in others, the golden
fish for its beauty; in others, the crawfish; in others,
for want of larger gods, the crabs, where they had no
other fish, or where they knew not how to catch and
kill them. In short, they had whatever fish was most
serviceable to them as their gods.</q><note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>Royal Commentaries
of the Yncas</hi>, First Part, bk.
i. ch. 10, vol. i. p. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, Hakluyt
Society. Cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, ii. p. 148.</note> The Otawa
Indians of Canada, believing that the souls of dead
fish passed into other bodies of fish, never burned
fish bones, for fear of displeasing the souls of the fish,
who would come no more to the nets.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1667, p.
12.</note> The Hurons
also refrained from throwing fish bones into the fire,
lest the souls of the fish should go and warn the other
fish not to let themselves be caught, since the Hurons
would burn their bones. Moreover, they had men
who preached to the fish and persuaded them to come
and be caught. A good preacher was much sought
after, for they thought that the exhortations of a clever
man had a great effect in drawing the fish to the
nets. In the Huron fishing village where the French
missionary Sagard stayed, the preacher to the fish
prided himself very much on his eloquence, which
was of a florid order. Every evening after supper,
having seen that all the people were in their places
and that a strict silence was observed, he preached
to the fish. His text was that the Hurons did not
burn fish bones. <q>Then enlarging on his theme
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
with extraordinary unction, he exhorted and conjured
and invited and implored the fish to come and be
caught and to be of good courage and to fear nothing,
for it was all to serve their friends who honoured them
and did not burn their bones.</q><note place='foot'>Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le Grand Voyage du Pays
des Hurons</hi>, p. 255 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (p. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
of the Paris reprint).</note> The disappearance
of herring from the sea about Heligoland in 1530 was
attributed by the fishermen to the fact that two lads
had whipped a freshly-caught herring and then flung
it back into the sea.<note place='foot'>Schleiden, <hi rend='italic'>Das Salz</hi>, p. 47. For
this reference I am indebted to my
friend Prof. W. Robertson Smith.</note> The natives of the Duke of
York Island annually decorate a canoe with flowers
and ferns, lade it, or are supposed to lade it, with
shell-money, and set it adrift to pay the fish for those
they lose by being caught.<note place='foot'>W. Powell, <hi rend='italic'>Wanderings in a Wild
Country</hi>, p. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is especially necessary
to treat the first fish caught with consideration in
order to conciliate the rest of the fish, for their conduct
may be supposed to be influenced by the reception
given to the first of their kind which is taken. Accordingly
the Maoris always put back into the sea the
first fish caught, <q>with a prayer that it may tempt
other fish to come and be caught.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui; or, New
Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>, p. 200;
A. S. Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Story of New
Zealand</hi>, i. 202; E. Tregear, <q>The
Maoris of New Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal Anthrop.
Inst.</hi> xix. 109.</note>
</p>

<p>
Still more stringent are the precautions taken
when the fish are the first of the season. On salmon
rivers, when the fish begin to run up the stream in
spring, they are received with much deference by
tribes who, like the Indians of the Pacific Coast of
North America, subsist largely upon a fish diet. In
British Columbia the Indians used to go out to meet
the first fish as they came up the river. <q>They paid
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
court to them, and would address them thus. <q>You
fish, you fish; you are all chiefs, you are; you are all
chiefs.</q></q><note place='foot'>Lubbock, <hi rend='italic'>Origin of Civilisation</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, p. 277, quoting <hi rend='italic'>Metlahkatlah</hi>, p. 96.</note> Amongst the Thlinket of Alaska the first
halibut of the season is carefully handled, addressed as
a chief, and a festival is given in his honour, after
which the fishing goes on.<note place='foot'>W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>, p. 413.</note> In spring, when the
winds blow soft from the south and the salmon begin
to run up the Klamath river, the Karoks of California
dance for salmon, to ensure a good catch. One of the
Indians, called the Kareya or God-man, retires to the
mountains and fasts for ten days. On his return the
people flee, while he goes to the river, takes the first
salmon of the catch, eats some of it, and with the rest
kindles the sacred fire in the sweating-house. <q>No
Indian may take a salmon before this dance is held,
nor for ten days after it, even if his family are
starving.</q> The Karoks also believe that a fisherman
will take no salmon if the poles of which his spearing-booth
is made were gathered on the river-side, where
the salmon might have seen them. The poles must
be brought from the top of the highest mountain. The
fisherman will also labour in vain if he uses the same
poles a second year in booths or weirs, <q>because the
old salmon will have told the young ones about
them.</q><note place='foot'>Stephen Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>, p. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Indians of the Columbia River,
<q>when the salmon make their first appearance in the
river, they are never allowed to be cut crosswise,
nor boiled, but roasted; nor are they allowed to be
sold without the heart being first taken out, nor to
be kept over night, but must be all consumed or eaten
the day they are taken out of the water. All these
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
rules are observed for about ten days.</q><note place='foot'>Alex. Ross, <hi rend='italic'>Adventures of the First
Settlers on the Oregon or Columbia
River</hi>, p. 97.</note> They think
that if the heart of a fish were eaten by a stranger
at the beginning of the season, they would catch no
more fish. Hence, they roast and eat the hearts
themselves.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the U.S.
Exploring Expedition</hi>, iv. 324, v. 119,
where it is said, <q>a dog must never be
permitted to eat the heart of a salmon;
and in order to prevent this, they cut
the heart of the fish out before they sell
it.</q></note> There is a favourite fish of the Ainos
which appears in their rivers about May and June.
They prepare for the fishing by observing rules of
ceremonial purity, and when they have gone out to
fish, the women at home must keep strict silence or the
fish would hear them and disappear. When the first
fish is caught he is brought home and passed through a
small opening at the end of the hut, but not through
the door; for if he were passed through the door, <q>the
other fish would certainly see him and disappear.</q><note place='foot'>H. C. St. John, <q>The Ainos,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> ii. 253; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Notes and Sketches from the Wild Coasts
of Nipon</hi>, p. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
This explains the custom observed by other savages of
bringing game into their huts, not by the door, but by
the window, the smoke-hole, or by a special opening at
the back of the hut.<note place='foot'>Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi>, p. 242 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> vii. 207; <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d'Ethnographie</hi>, ii. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
With some savages a special reason for respecting
the bones of game, and generally of the animals which
they eat, is a belief that, if the bones are preserved,
they will in course of time be reclothed with flesh, and
thus the animal will come to life again. It is, therefore,
clearly for the interest of the hunter to leave
the bones intact, since to destroy them would be to
diminish the future supply of game. Many of the Minnetaree
Indians <q>believe that the bones of those bisons
which they have slain and divested of flesh rise again
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
clothed with renewed flesh, and quickened with life,
and become fat, and fit for slaughter the succeeding
June.</q><note place='foot'>James, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition from Pittsburgh
to the Rocky Mountains</hi>, i. 257.</note> Hence on the western prairies of America,
the skulls of buffalos may be seen arranged in circles
and symmetrical piles, awaiting the resurrection.<note place='foot'>Brinton, <hi rend='italic'>Myths of the New World</hi>,
p. 278.</note> After
feasting on a dog, the Dacotas carefully collect the
bones, scrape, wash, and bury them, <q>partly, as it is said,
to testify to the dog-species, that in feasting upon one
of their number no disrespect was meant to the species
itself, and partly also from a belief that the bones of
the animal will rise and reproduce another.</q><note place='foot'>Keating, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition to the Source
of St. Peter's River</hi>, i. 452.</note> In
sacrificing an animal the Lapps regularly put aside the
bones, eyes, ears, heart, lungs, sexual parts (if the
animal was a male), and a morsel of flesh from each
limb. Then, after eating the rest of the flesh, they
laid the bones etc. in anatomical order in a coffin and
buried them with the usual rites, believing that the
god to whom the animal was sacrificed would reclothe
the bones with flesh and restore the animal to life in
Jabme-Aimo, the subterranean world of the dead.
Sometimes, as after feasting on a bear, they seem to
have contented themselves with thus burying the
bones.<note place='foot'>E. J. Jessen, <hi rend='italic'>De Finnorum Lapponumque
Norwegicorum religione pagana
tractatus singularis</hi>, pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 52
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 65. The work of Jessen is bound
up (paged separately) with the work of
C. Leem, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae
eorumque lingua, vita, et religione
pristina commentatio</hi> (Latin and Danish),
Copenhagen, 1767. Compare Leem's
work, pp. 418-420 (Latin), 428 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
also Acerbi, <hi rend='italic'>Travels through Sweden,
Finnland, and Lapland</hi>, ii. 302.</note> Thus the Lapps expected the resurrection of
the slain animal to take place in another world, resembling
in this respect the Kamtchatkans, who believed
that every creature, down to the smallest fly, would
rise from the dead and live underground.<note place='foot'>Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von dem
Lande Kamtschatka</hi>, p. 269; Kraschennikow,
<hi rend='italic'>Kamtschatka</hi>, p. 246.</note> On the
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
other hand, the North American Indians looked for
the resurrection of the animals in the present world.
The habit, observed especially by Mongolian peoples,
of stuffing the skin of a sacrificed animal, or stretching
it on a framework,<note place='foot'>See Erman, referred to above, p.
<ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>,
i. 274, ii. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 214; Vambery, Das <hi rend='italic'>Türkenvolk</hi>, p. 118 sq. When a fox,
the sacred animal of the Conchucos in
Peru, had been killed, its skin was
stuffed and set up. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer
des alten Amerika</hi>, i. 443.
Cp. the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>, above, p. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> points rather to a belief in a resurrection
of the latter sort. The objection commonly
entertained by primitive peoples to break the bones of
the animals which they have eaten or sacrificed<note place='foot'>At the annual sacrifice of the
White Dog, the Iroquois were careful
to strangle the animal without shedding
its blood or breaking its bones. The
dog was afterwards burned. L. H.
Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>League of the Iroquois</hi>, p.
210. It is a rule with some of the
Australian blacks that in killing the
native bear they must not break his
bones. They say that the native bear
once stole all the water of the river,
and that if they were to break his bones
or take off his skin before roasting him,
he would do so again. Brough Smyth,
<hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of Victoria</hi>, i. 447 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> When
the Tartars whom Carpini visited killed
animals for eating, they might not break
their bones but burned them with fire.
Carpini, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Mongalorum</hi> (Paris,
1838), cap. iii. § i. 2, p. 620. North
American Indians might not break the
bones of the animals which they ate at
feasts. Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, vi. 72. In the war feast held
by Indian warriors after leaving home,
a whole animal was cooked and had to
be all eaten. No bone of it might be
broken. After being stripped of the
flesh the bones were hung on a tree.
<hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Captivity and Adventures
of John Tanner</hi>, p. 287. On
St. Olaf's Day (29th July) the Karels
of Finland kill a lamb, without using a
knife, and roast it whole. None of
its bones may be broken. The lamb
has not been shorn since spring. Some
of the flesh is placed in a corner of the
room for the house-spirits, some is
deposited on the field and beside the
birch-trees which are destined to be
used as May-trees next year. W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>. The
Innuit (Esquimaux) of Point Barrow,
Alaska, carefully preserve unbroken
the bones of the seals which they have
caught and return them to the sea,
either leaving them in an ice-crack far
out from the land or dropping them
through a hole in the ice. By doing
so they think they secure good fortune
in the pursuit of seals. <hi rend='italic'>Report of the
International Expedition to Point Barrow,
Alaska</hi> (Washington, 1885), p.
40. In this last custom the idea probably
is that the bones will be reclothed
with flesh and the seals come to life
again. The Mosquito Indians of Central
America carefully preserved the bones
of deer and the shells of eggs, lest the
deer or chickens should die or disappear.
Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific
States</hi>, i. 741. The Yurucares of
Bolivia <q>carefully put by even small
fish bones, saying that unless this is
done the fish and game will disappear
from the country.</q> Brinton, <hi rend='italic'>Myths of
the New World</hi>, p. 278.</note> may
be based either on a belief in the resurrection of the
animals, or on a fear of intimidating the other creatures
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
of the same species and offending the ghosts of the
slain animals. The reluctance of North American
Indians to let dogs gnaw the bones of animals<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1634, p.
25, ed. 1858; A. Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
through the Continent of America</hi>, civ;
J. Dunn, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Oregon Territory</hi>,
p. 99; Whymper in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Royal
Geogr. Soc.</hi> xxxviii. (1868) p. 228; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>
in <hi rend='italic'>Transact. Ethnolog. Soc.</hi> vii. 174;
A. P. Reid, <q>Religious Belief of the
Ojibois Indians,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop.
Inst.</hi> iii. 111. After a meal the Indians
of Costa Rica gather all the bones
carefully and either burn them or put
them out of reach of the dogs. W. M.
Gabb, <hi rend='italic'>On the Indian Tribes and Languages
of Costa Rica</hi> (read before the
American Philosophical Society, 20th
Aug. 1875), p. 520 (Philadelphia,
1875). The fact that the bones
are often burned to prevent the dogs
getting them does not contradict the
view suggested in the text. It may
be a way of transmitting the bones
to the spirit-land. The aborigines of
Australia burn the bones of the animals
which they eat, but for a different
reason; they think that if an enemy
got hold of the bones and burned them
with charms, it would cause the death
of the person who had eaten the animal.
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>, pp.
24, 196.</note> is perhaps
only a precaution to prevent the bones from being
broken. There are traces in folk-tales of the same
primitive belief that animals or men may come to life
again, if only their bones are preserved; not uncommonly
the animal or man in the story comes to life
lame of a limb, because one of his bones has been
eaten, broken, or lost.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>,
pp. 57-74; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 116; Cosquin,
<hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de Lorraine</hi>, ii. 25;
Hartland, <q>The physicians of Myddfai,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Archaeological Review</hi>, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In
folk-tales, as in primitive custom, the
blood is sometimes not allowed to fall
on the ground. See Cosquin, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In a Magyar tale, the hero is
cut in pieces, but the serpent-king lays the bones
together in their proper order, and washes them with
water, whereupon the hero comes to life again. His
shoulder-blade, however, had been lost, so the serpent-king
supplied its place with one of gold and ivory.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germ. Myth.</hi> p. 66.</note>
Such stories, as Mannhardt has seen, explain why
Pythagoras, who claimed to have lived many lives, one
after the other, was said to have exhibited his golden
leg as a proof of his supernatural pretensions.<note place='foot'>Jamblichus, <hi rend='italic'>Vita Pythag.</hi> §§ 92,
135, 140; Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Pythag.</hi> § 28.</note> Doubtless
he was reported to have explained that at one of
his resurrections a leg had been broken or mislaid,
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
and that it had been replaced with one of gold.
Similarly, when the murdered Pelops was restored
to life, the shoulder which Demeter had eaten was
replaced with one of ivory.<note place='foot'>Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi> i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, with
the Scholiast.</note> The story that one of
the members of the mangled Osiris was eaten by fish,
and that, when Isis collected his scattered limbs, she
replaced the missing member with one of wood,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 18. This
is one of the sacred stories which the
pious Herodotus (ii. 48) concealed and
the pious Plutarch divulged.</note> may
perhaps belong to the same circle of beliefs.
</p>

<p>
There is a certain rule observed by savage hunters
and fishers which, obscure at first sight, may be
explained by this savage belief in resurrection. A
traveller in America in the early part of this century
was told by a half-breed Choctaw that the Indians
<q>had an obscure story, somewhat resembling that of
Jacob wrestling with an angel; and that the full-blooded
Indians always separate the sinew which shrank, and
that it is never seen in the venison exposed for sale;
he did not know what they did with it. His elder
brother, whom I afterwards met, told me that they eat
it as a rarity; but I have also heard, though on less
respectable authority, that they refrain from it, like the
ancient Jews. A gentleman, who had lived on the
Indian frontier, or in the nation, for ten or fifteen years,
told me that he had often been surprised that the
Indians always detached the sinew; but it had never
occurred to him to inquire the reason.</q><note place='foot'>Adam Hodgson, <hi rend='italic'>Letters from North
America</hi>, i. 244.</note> James Adair,
who knew the Indians of the South Eastern States
intimately, and whose theories appear not to have distorted
his view of the facts, observes that <q>when in
the woods, the Indians cut a small piece out of the
lower part of the thighs of the deer they kill, lengthways
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
and pretty deep. Among the great number of
venison-hams they bring to our trading houses, I do
not remember to have observed one without it....
And I have been assured by a gentleman of character,
who is now an inhabitant of South Carolina, and well
acquainted with the customs of the Northern Indians,
that they also cut a piece out of the thigh of every deer
they kill, and throw it away; and reckon it such a
dangerous pollution to eat it as to occasion sickness
and other misfortunes of sundry kinds, especially by
spoiling their guns from shooting with proper force and
direction.</q><note place='foot'>Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American Indians</hi>, p. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In recent years the statement of Adair's
informant has been confirmed by the French missionary
Petitot, who has also published the <q>obscure story</q> to
which Hodgson refers. The Loucheux and Hare-skin
Indians who roam the bleak steppes and forests that
stretch from Hudson's Bay to the Rocky Mountains,
and northward to the frozen sea, are forbidden by
custom to eat the sinew of the legs of animals. To
explain this custom they tell the following <q>sacred
story.</q> Once upon a time a man found a burrow of
porcupines, and going down into it after the porcupines
he lost his way in the darkness, till a kind giant called
<q>He who sees before and behind</q> released him by
cleaving open the earth. So the man, whose name
was <q>Fireless and Homeless,</q> lived with the kind
giant, and the giant hunted elans and beavers for him,
and carried him about in the sheath of his flint knife.
<q>But know, my son,</q> said the giant, <q>that he who
uses the sky as his head is angry with me, and has
sworn my destruction. If he slays me the clouds will
be tinged with my blood; they will be red with it, probably.</q>
Then he gave the man an axe made of the
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
tooth of a gigantic beaver, and went forth to meet his
enemy. But from under the ice the man heard a dull
muffled sound. It was a whale which was making this
noise because it was naked and cold. Warned by the
man, the giant went toward the whale, which took
human shape, and rushed upon the giant. It was
the wicked giant, the kind giant's enemy. The two
struggled together for a long time, till the kind giant
cried, <q>Oh, my son! cut, cut the sinew of the leg.</q>
The man cut the sinew, and the wicked giant fell down
and was slain. That is why the Indians do not eat
the sinew of the leg. Afterwards, one day the sky
suddenly grew red, so Fireless and Homeless knew
that the kind giant was dead, and he wept.<note place='foot'>Petitot, <hi rend='italic'>Monographie des Dènè-Dindjié?</hi>
(Paris, 1867), pp. 77, 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions indiennes du Canada
Nord-ouest</hi> (Paris, 1886), p. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
cp. pp. 41, 76, 213, 264.</note> This
myth, it is almost needless to observe, does not really
explain the custom. No people ever observed a custom
because a mythical being was said to have once acted
in a certain way. But, on the contrary, all peoples
have invented myths to explain why they observed
certain customs. Dismissing, therefore, the story of
Fireless and Homeless as a myth invented to explain
why the Indians abstain from eating a particular sinew,
it may be suggested<note place='foot'>The first part of this suggestion is
that of my friend Prof. W. Robertson
Smith. See his <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on the Religion
of the Semites</hi>, first series, p. 360, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>
2. The Faleshas, a Jewish sect of
Abyssinia, after killing an animal for
food, <q>carefully remove the vein from
the thighs with its surrounding flesh.</q>
Halévy, <q>Travels in Abyssinia,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Publications of the Society of Hebrew
Literature</hi>, second series, vol. ii. p.
220.</note> that the original reason for observing
the custom was a belief that the sinew in question
was necessary to reproduction, and that deprived of it
the slain animals could not come to life again and stock
the steppes and prairies either of the present world or
of the spirit land. We have seen that the resurrection
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
of animals is a common article of savage faith, and that
when the Lapps bury the skeleton of the male bear in
the hope of its resurrection they are careful to bury
the genital parts along with it.<note place='foot'>It seems to be a common custom
with hunters to cut out the tongues of
the animals which they kill. Omaha
hunters remove the tongue of a slain
buffalo through an opening made in the
animal's throat. The tongues thus removed
are sacred and may not touch
any tool or metal except when they are
boiling in the kettles at the sacred tent.
They are eaten as sacred food. <hi rend='italic'>Third
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington), p. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Indian bear-hunters
cut out what they call the bear's
little tongue (a fleshy mass under the
real tongue) and keep it for good luck
in hunting or burn it to determine from
its crackling, etc., whether the soul of
the slain bear is angry with them or
not. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Kitschi-Gami</hi>, ii. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, v. 173; Chateaubriand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
en Amérique</hi>, pp. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 184. In folk-tales
the hero commonly cuts out the
tongue of the wild beast which he has
slain and preserves it as a token. The
incident serves to show that the custom
was a common one, since folk-tales
reflect with accuracy the customs and
beliefs of a primitive age. For examples
of the incident, see Blade, <hi rend='italic'>Contes
populaires recueillis en Agenais</hi>, pp. 12,
14; Dasent, <hi rend='italic'>Tales from the Norse</hi>, p. 133
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<q>Shortshanks</q>); Schleicher, <hi rend='italic'>Litauische
Märchen</hi>; Sepp, Altbayerischer
Sagenschatz, p. 114; Köhler on
Gonzenbach's <hi rend='italic'>Sicilianische Märchen</hi>, ii.
230; Apollodorus, iii. 13, 3; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 53; Poestion, <hi rend='italic'>Lapplandische
Märchen</hi>, p. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It may be suggested
that the cutting out of the tongues
is a precaution to prevent the slain
animals from telling their fate to the
live animals and thus frightening away
the latter. At least this explanation
harmonises with the primitive modes
of thought revealed in the foregoing
customs.</note>
</p>

<p>
Besides the animals which primitive man dreads
for their strength and ferocity, and those which he
reveres on account of the benefits which he expects
from them, there is another class of creatures which he
sometimes deems it necessary to conciliate by worship
and sacrifice. These are the vermin that infest the
crops. To rid himself of these deadly foes the farmer
has recourse to a thousand superstitious devices, of
which, though many are meant to destroy or intimidate
the vermin, others aim at propitiating them and persuading
them by fair means to spare the fruits of the
earth. Thus Esthonian peasants, in the Island of
Oesel, stand in great awe of the weevil, an insect which
is exceedingly destructive to the grain. They give it
a euphemistic title, and if a child is about to kill a
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
weevil they say, <q>Don't do it; the more we hurt him,
the more he hurts us.</q> If they find a weevil they bury
it in the earth instead of killing it. Some even put the
weevil under a stone in the field and offer corn to it.
They think that thus it is appeased and does less
harm.<note place='foot'>Holzmayer, <hi rend='italic'>Osiliana</hi>, p. 105 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> Amongst the Saxons of Transylvania, in order
to keep sparrows from the corn, the sower begins by
throwing the first handful of seed backwards over his
head, saying, <q>That is for you, sparrows.</q> To guard
the corn against the attacks of leaf-flies (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Erdflöhe</foreign>) he
shuts his eyes and scatters three handfuls of oats in
different directions. Having made this offering to the
leaf-flies he feels sure that they will spare the corn. A
Transylvanian way of securing the crops against all
birds, beasts, and insects, is this: After he has finished
sowing, the sower goes once more from end to end of
the field imitating the gesture of sowing, but with an
empty hand. As he does so he says, <q>I sow this for
the animals; I sow it for everything that flies and
creeps, that walks and stands, that sings and springs,
in the name of God the Father, etc.</q><note place='foot'>Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten und
Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</hi>,
p. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The following
is a German way of freeing a garden from caterpillars.
After sunset or at midnight the mistress of the house,
or another female member of the family, walks all
round the garden dragging a broom after her. She
must not look behind her, and must keep murmuring,
<q>Good evening, Mother Caterpillar, you shall come
with your husband to church.</q> The garden gate is
left open till the following morning.<note place='foot'>E. Krause, <q>Aberglaubische Kuren
und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xv. (1883)
p. 93.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes in dealing with vermin the farmer
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
resorts neither to unmitigated severity nor to unbounded
indulgence, but aims at adopting a judicious
compromise between the two; kind but firm, he
tempers severity with mercy. An ancient Greek
treatise on farming advises the husbandman who
would rid his lands of mice to act thus: <q>Take a
sheet of paper and write on it as follows: <q>I adjure
you, ye mice here present, that ye neither injure me
nor suffer another mouse to do so. I give you yonder
field</q> (here you specify the field); <q>but if ever I
catch you here again, by the Mother of the Gods
I will rend you in seven pieces.</q> Write this, and
stick the paper on an unhewn stone in the field
before sunrise, taking care to keep the written side
uppermost.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xiii. 5. According to
the commentator, the field assigned to
the mice is a neighbour's, but it may
be a patch of waste ground on the
farmer's own land.</note> Sometimes the desired object is
supposed to be attained by treating with high
distinction one or two chosen individuals of the
obnoxious species, while the rest are pursued with
relentless rigour. In the East Indian island of
Bali, the mice which ravage the rice-fields are
caught in great numbers, and burned in the same
way that corpses are burned. But two of the
captured mice are allowed to live, and receive a
little packet of white linen. Then the people bow
down before them, as before gods, and let them
go.<note place='foot'>R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het
eiland Bali,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, N.S. viii. (1879) p. 125.</note> In some parts of Bohemia the peasant, though
he kills field mice and gray mice without scruple,
always spares white mice. If he finds a white mouse
he takes it up carefully, and makes a comfortable bed
for it in the window; for if it died the luck of the
house would be gone, and the gray mice would
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
multiply fearfully in the house.<note place='foot'>Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und Gebräuche
aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>, §
405.</note> When caterpillars
invaded a vineyard or field in Syria, the virgins
were gathered, and one of the caterpillars was taken
and a girl made its mother. Then they bewailed
and buried it. Thereafter they conducted the
<q>mother</q> to the place where the caterpillars were,
consoling her, in order that all the caterpillars might
leave the garden.<note place='foot'>Lagarde, <hi rend='italic'>Reliquiae juris ecclesiastici
antiquissimae</hi>, p. 135. For this passage
I am indebted to my friend Prof. W.
Robertson Smith, who kindly translated
it for me from the Syriac.</note> On the 1st of September, Russian
girls <q>make small coffins of turnips and other vegetables,
enclose flies and other insects in them, and
then bury them with a great show of mourning.</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 255.</note>
</p>

<p>
In these latter examples the deference shown to
a few chosen individuals of the species is apparently
regarded as entitling a person to exterminate with
impunity all the rest of the species upon which he
can lay hands. This principle perhaps explains the
attitude, at first sight puzzling and contradictory, of
the Ainos towards the bear. The flesh and skin of
the bear regularly afford them food and clothing; but
since the bear is an intelligent and powerful animal, it
is necessary to offer some satisfaction or atonement
to the bear species for the loss which it sustains
in the death of so many of its members. This satisfaction
or atonement is made by rearing young bears,
treating them, so long as they live, with respect, and
killing them with extraordinary marks of sorrow and
devotion. Thus the other bears are appeased, and do
not resent the slaughter of their kind by attacking the
slayers or deserting the country, and thus depriving
the Ainos of one of their means of subsistence.
</p>

<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>

<p>
Thus the primitive worship of animals assumes
two forms, which are in some respects the converse of
each other. On the one hand animals are respected,
and are therefore neither killed nor eaten. Totemism
is a form of this worship, if worship it can be called;
but it is not the only form, for we have seen that
dangerous and useless animals, like the crocodile, are
commonly revered and spared by men who do not
regard the animal in question as their totem. On the
other hand animals are worshipped because they are
habitually killed and eaten. In both forms of worship
the animal is revered on account of some benefit,
positive or negative, which the savage hopes to
receive from it. In the former worship the benefit
comes either in the positive form of protection, advice,
and help which the animal affords the man, or in the
negative one of abstinence from injuries which it
is in the power of the animal to inflict. In the
latter worship the benefit takes the material form
of the animal's flesh and skin. The two forms of
worship are in some measure antithetical: in the
one, the animal is not eaten because it is revered;
in the other, it is revered because it is eaten. But
both may be practised by the same people, as we
see in the case of the North American Indians,
who, while they revere and spare their totem animals,
also revere the animals and fish upon which they
subsist. The aborigines of Australia have totemism
in the most primitive form known to us, but, so far
as I am aware, there is no evidence that they attempt,
like the North American Indians, to conciliate
the animals which they kill and eat. The
means which the Australians adopt to secure a
plentiful supply of game appear to be based not on
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
conciliation, but on sympathetic magic,<note place='foot'>Compare <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South
Australia</hi>, p. 280, with the customs
referred to in the following note.</note> a principle
to which the North American Indians also resort
for the same purpose.<note place='foot'>Catlin, <hi rend='italic'>O-Kee-pa</hi>, Folium reservatum;
Lewis and Clarke, <hi rend='italic'>Travels to
the Source of the Missouri River</hi> (London,
1815), i. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> If this is so, it would appear
that the totemistic respect for animals is older than
the other, and that, before hunters think of worshipping
the game as a means of ensuring an
abundant supply of it, they seek to attain the same
end by sympathetic magic. This, again, would show&mdash;what
there is good reason for believing&mdash;that
sympathetic magic is one of the earliest means by
which man endeavours to adapt the agencies of nature
to his needs.
</p>

<p>
Corresponding to the two distinct types of animal
worship, there are two distinct types of the custom of
killing the animal god. On the one hand, when the
revered animal is habitually spared, it is nevertheless
killed&mdash;and sometimes eaten&mdash;on rare and solemn
occasions. Examples of this custom have been
already given and an explanation of them offered.
On the other hand, when the revered animal is
habitually killed, the slaughter of any one of the
species involves the killing of the god, and is atoned
for on the spot by apologies and sacrifices, especially
when the animal is a powerful and dangerous one;
and, in addition to this ordinary and everyday atonement,
there is a special annual atonement, at which
a select individual of the species is slain with extraordinary
marks of respect and devotion. Clearly the
two types of sacramental killing&mdash;the Egyptian and
the Aino types, as we may call them for distinction&mdash;are
liable to be confounded by an observer; and,
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
before we can say to which type any particular
example belongs, it is necessary to ascertain whether
the animal sacramentally slain belongs to a species
which is habitually spared, or to one which is
habitually killed by the tribe. In the former case
the example belongs to the Egyptian type of sacrament,
in the latter to the Aino type.
</p>

<p>
The practice of pastoral tribes appears to furnish
examples of both types of sacrament. <q>Pastoral
tribes,</q> says the most learned ethnologist of the day,
<q>being sometimes obliged to sell their herds to
strangers who may handle the bones disrespectfully,
seek to avert the danger which such a sacrilege would
entail by consecrating one of the herd as an object of
worship, eating it sacramentally in the family circle
with closed doors, and afterwards treating the bones
with all the ceremonious respect which, strictly speaking,
should be accorded to every head of cattle, but
which, being punctually paid to the representative
animal, is deemed to be paid to all. Such family
meals are found among various peoples, especially
those of the Caucasus. When amongst the Abchases
the shepherds in spring eat their common meal with
their loins girt and their staffs in their hands, this may
be looked upon both as a sacrament and as an oath of
mutual help and support. For the strongest of all
oaths is that which is accompanied with the eating of
a sacred substance, since the perjured person cannot
possibly escape the avenging god whom he has taken
into his body and assimilated.</q><note place='foot'>A. Bastian, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der
Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1870-71,
p. 59. Reinegg (<hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung des
Kaukasus</hi>, ii. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) describes what
seems to be a sacrament of the
Abghazses (Abchases). It takes place
in the middle of autumn. A white ox
called Ogginn appears from a holy
cave, which is also called Ogginn. It
is caught and led about amongst the
assembled men (women are excluded)
amid joyful cries. Then it is killed
and eaten. Any man who did not get
at least a scrap of the sacred flesh
would deem himself most unfortunate.
The bones are then carefully collected,
burned in a great hole, and the ashes
buried there.</note> This kind of sacrament
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
is of the Aino or expiatory type, since it is meant
to atone to the species for the possible ill-usage of
individuals. An expiation, similar in principle but
different in details, is offered by the Kalmucks to the
sheep whose flesh is one of their staple foods. Rich
Kalmucks are in the habit of consecrating a white
ram under the title of <q>the ram of heaven</q> or <q>the
ram of the spirit.</q> The animal is never shorn and
never sold; but when it grows old and its owner
wishes to consecrate a new one, the old ram must be
killed and eaten at a feast to which the neighbours are
invited. On a lucky day, generally in autumn when
the sheep are fat, a sorcerer kills the old ram, after
sprinkling it with milk. Its flesh is eaten; the
skeleton, with a portion of the fat, is burned on a
turf altar; and the skin, with the head and feet, is
hung up.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, vi. 632 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>. On the Kalmucks
as a people of shepherds and on their
diet of mutton, see Georgi, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
aller Nationen des russischen Reichs</hi>,
p. 406 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, cp. 207; B. Bergmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Nomadische Streifereien unter den
Kalmücken</hi>, ii. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 122; Pallas,
<hi rend='italic'>Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des
russischen Reichs</hi>, i. 319, 325. According
to Pallas, it is only rich Kalmucks
who commonly kill their sheep or
cattle for eating; ordinary Kalmucks
do not usually kill them except in case
of necessity or at great merry-makings.
It is, therefore, especially the rich who
need to make expiation.</note>
</p>

<p>
An example of a sacrament of the Egyptian type
is furnished by the Todas, a pastoral people of
Southern India, who subsist largely upon the milk of
their buffaloes. Amongst them <q>the buffalo is to a
certain degree held sacred</q> and <q>is treated with great
kindness, even with a degree of adoration, by the
people.</q><note place='foot'>W. E. Marshall, <hi rend='italic'>Travels amongst
the Todas</hi>, p. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the Todas,
see also above, vol. i. p. 41.</note> They never eat the flesh of the cow buffalo,
and as a rule abstain from the flesh of the male. But
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
to the latter rule there is a single exception. Once a
year all the adult males of the village join in the
ceremony of killing and eating a very young male
calf,&mdash;seemingly under a month old. They take the
animal into the dark recesses of the village wood,
where it is killed with a club made from the sacred
tree of the Todas (the <foreign rend='italic'>tûde</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Millingtonia</foreign>). A
sacred fire having been made by the rubbing of sticks,
the flesh of the calf is roasted on the embers of certain
trees, and is eaten by the men alone, women being
excluded from the assembly. This is the only occasion
on which the Todas eat buffalo flesh.<note place='foot'>Marshall, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> 130.</note> The Madi or
Moru tribe of Central Africa, whose chief wealth is
their cattle, though they also practice agriculture,
appear to kill a lamb sacramentally on certain solemn
occasions. The custom is thus described by Dr.
Felkin. <q>A remarkable custom is observed at stated
times&mdash;once a year, I am led to believe. I have not
been able to ascertain what exact meaning is attached
to it. It appears, however, to relieve the people's
minds, for beforehand they evince much sadness, and
seem very joyful when the ceremony is duly accomplished.
The following is what takes place: A large
concourse of people of all ages assemble, and sit down
round a circle of stones, which is erected by the side of
a road (really a narrow path). A very choice lamb is
then fetched by a boy, who leads it four times round
the assembled people. As it passes they pluck off
little bits of its fleece and place them in their hair, or
on to some other part of their body. The lamb is then
led up to the stones, and there killed by a man belonging
to a kind of priestly order, who takes some of the
blood and sprinkles it four times over the people. He
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
then applies it individually. On the children he makes
a small ring of blood over the lower end of the breast
bone, on women and girls he makes a mark above the
breasts, and the men he touches on each shoulder.
He then proceeds to explain the ceremony, and to
exhort the people to show kindness.... When this
discourse, which is at times of great length, is over,
the people rise, each places a leaf on or by the circle
of stones, and then they depart with signs of great joy.
The lamb's skull is hung on a tree near the stones,
and its flesh is eaten by the poor. This ceremony is
observed on a small scale at other times. If a family
is in any great trouble, through illness or bereavement,
their friends and neighbours come together and a lamb
is killed: this is thought to avert further evil. The
same custom prevails at the grave of departed friends,
and also on joyful occasions, such as the return of a
son home after a very prolonged absence.</q><note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh</hi>, xii. (1882-84) p. 336 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
sorrow thus manifested by the people at the annual
slaughter of the lamb clearly indicates that the lamb
slain is a divine animal, whose death is mourned by
his worshippers,<note place='foot'>The fact that the flesh of sheep
appears to be now eaten by the tribe
as a regular article of food (Felkin, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 307), is not inconsistent with
the original sanctity of the sheep.</note> just as the death of the sacred
buzzard was mourned by the Californians and the
death of the Theban ram by the Egyptians. The
smearing each of the worshippers with the blood of
the lamb is a form of communion with the divinity;<note place='foot'>See W. R. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Semites</hi>, i. p. 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
the vehicle of the divine life is applied externally
instead of being taken internally, as when the blood is
drunk or the flesh eaten.
</p>

<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<p>
The form of communion in which the sacred
animal is taken from house to house, that all may
enjoy a share of its divine influence, has been
exemplified by the Gilyak custom of promenading the
bear through the village before it is slain. A similar
form of communion with the sacred snake is observed
by a Snake tribe in the Punjaub. Once a year in the
month of September the snake is worshipped by all
castes and religions for nine days only. At the end of
August the Mirasans, especially those of the Snake
tribe, make a snake of dough which they paint black
and red, and place on a winnowing basket. This
basket they carry round the village, and on entering
any house they say&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>God be with you all!</q></l>
<l>May every ill be far!</l>
<l><q rend='post'>May our patron's (Gugga's) word thrive!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
They then present the basket with the snake, saying&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>A small cake of flour:</q></l>
<l>A little bit of butter:</l>
<l>If you obey the snake,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>You and yours shall thrive!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Strictly speaking, a cake and butter should be given,
but it is seldom done. Every one, however, gives
something, generally a handful of dough or some corn.
In houses where there is a new bride or whence a bride
has gone, or where a son has been born, it is usual to
give a rupee and a quarter, or some cloth. Sometimes
the bearers of the snake also sing&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Give the snake a piece of cloth,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>And he will send a lively bride.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When every house has been thus visited, the dough
snake is buried and a small grave is erected over it.
Hither during the nine days of September the women
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
come to worship. They bring a basin of curds, a
small portion of which they offer at the snake's grave,
kneeling on the ground and touching the earth with
their foreheads. Then they go home and divide the
rest of the curds among the children. Here the
dough snake is clearly a substitute for a real snake.
This is proved by the fact that in districts where
snakes abound the worship is offered, not at the
grave of the dough snake, but in the jungles where
snakes are known to be. Besides this yearly worship
performed by all the people, the members of the Snake
tribe worship in the same way every morning after a
new moon. The Snake tribe is not uncommon in the
Punjaub. Members of it will not kill a snake and
they say that its bite does not hurt them. If they
find a dead snake, they put clothes on it and give it a
regular funeral.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. No.
555.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ceremonies closely analogous to this Indian worship
of the snake have survived in Europe into recent
times, and doubtless date from a very primitive
paganism. The best-known example is the <q>hunting
of the wren.</q> By many European peoples&mdash;the
ancient Greeks and Romans, the modern Italians,
Spaniards, French, Germans, Dutch, Danes, Swedes,
English, and Welsh&mdash;the wren has been designated
the king, the little king, the king of birds, the hedge
king, etc.,<note place='foot'>See Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
iii. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, Bohn's ed.; Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
of British Birds</hi>, p. 36; E. Rolland,
<hi rend='italic'>Faune populaire de la France</hi>, ii. 288
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The names for it are βασιλίσκος,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>regulus</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rex avium</foreign> (Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
viii. 90; x. 203), <foreign rend='italic'>re di siepe</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>reyezuelo</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>roitelet</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>roi des oiseaux</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Zaunkönig</foreign>, etc.</note> and has been reckoned amongst those
birds which it is extremely unlucky to kill. In
England it is thought that if any one kills a wren
or harries its nest, he will infallibly break a bone or
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
meet with some dreadful misfortune within the year;<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, iii.
194.</note>
sometimes it is thought that the cows will give bloody
milk.<note place='foot'>Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Rhymes of Scotland</hi>,
p. 188.</note> In Scotland the wren is called <q>the Lady of
Heaven's hen,</q> and boys say&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Malisons, malisons, mair than ten,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>That harry the Ladye of Heaven's hen!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 186.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At Saint Donan, in Brittany, people believe that if
children touch the young wrens in the nest, they will
suffer from the fire of St. Lawrence, that is, from
pimples on the face, legs, etc.<note place='foot'>P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions et Superstitions
de la Haute Bretagne</hi>, ii. 214.</note> In other parts of
France it is believed that if a person kills a wren or
harries its nest, his house will be struck by lightning,
or that the fingers with which he did the deed will
shrivel up and drop off, or at least be maimed, or that
his cattle will suffer in their feet.<note place='foot'>Rolland, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 42.</note> Notwithstanding
such beliefs, the custom of annually killing the wren
has prevailed widely both in this country and in
France. In the Isle of Man last century the custom
was observed on Christmas Eve or rather Christmas
morning. On the 24th of December, towards evening,
all the servants got a holiday; they did not go to bed
all night, but rambled about till the bells rang in all
the churches at midnight. When prayers were over,
they went to hunt the wren, and having found one
of these birds they killed it and fastened it to the top
of a long pole with its wings extended. Thus they
carried it in procession to every house chanting the
following rhyme&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,</q></l>
<l>We hunted the wren for Jack of the Can,</l>
<l>We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>We hunted the wren for every one.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<p>
After going from house to house and collecting all the
money they could, they laid the wren on a bier <q>with
the utmost solemnity, singing dirges over her in the
Manks language, which they call her knell; after
which Christmas begins.</q> After the burial the company
outside the churchyard formed a circle and
danced to music. About the middle of the present
century the burial of the wren took place in the
Isle of Man on St. Stephen's Day (December 26th).
Boys went from door to door with a wren suspended
by the legs in the centre of two hoops which crossed
each other at right angles and were decorated with
evergreens and ribbons. The bearers sang certain
lines in which reference was made to boiling and
eating the bird. If at the close of the song they
received a small coin, they gave in return a feather of
the wren; so that before the end of the day the bird
often hung almost featherless. The wren was then
buried, no longer in the churchyard, but on the sea-shore
or in some waste place. The feathers distributed
were preserved with religious care, it being
believed that every feather was an effectual preservative
from shipwreck for a year, and a fisherman
would have been thought very foolhardy who had not
one of them.<note place='foot'>G. Waldron, <hi rend='italic'>Description of the Isle of Man</hi> (reprinted for the Manx Society,
Douglas, 1865), p. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Train, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Isle of Man</hi>, ii. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> 141.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Ireland the <q>hunting of the wren</q> still takes
place in parts of Leinster and Connaught. On
Christmas Day or St. Stephen's Day the boys hunt
and kill the wren, fasten it in the middle of a mass
of holly and ivy on the top of a broomstick, and on St.
Stephen's Day go about with it from house to house,
singing&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The wren, the wren, the king of all birds,</q></l>
<l>St. Stephen's Day was caught in the furze;</l>
<l>Although he is little, his family's great,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>I pray you, good landlady, give us a treat.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Money or food (bread, butter, eggs, etc.) were given
them, upon which they feasted in the evening.
Sometimes in Ireland, as in the Isle of Man, the bird
was hung by the leg in the centre of two hoops
crossing each other at right angles.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, iii.
195; Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of British
Birds</hi>, p. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Rolland, <hi rend='italic'>Faune
populaire de la France</hi>, ii. 297; Professor
W. Ridgeway in <hi rend='italic'>Academy</hi>, 10th
May 1884, p. 332; Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British
Popular Customs</hi>, p. 497.</note> In Essex a
similar custom used to be observed at Christmas,
and the verses sung by the boys were almost identical
with those sung in Ireland.<note place='foot'>Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the Northern
Counties</hi>, p. 125.</note> In Pembrokeshire a
wren, called the King, used to be carried about on
Twelfth Day in a box with glass windows surmounted
by a wheel, from which hung various coloured ribbons.
The men and boys who carried it from house to house
sang songs, in one of which they wished <q>joy, health,
love, and peace</q> to the inmates of the house.<note place='foot'>Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the first half of this century similar customs
were still observed in various parts of the south of
France. Thus at Carcassone, every year on the first
Sunday of December the young people of the street
Saint Jean used to go out of the town armed with
sticks, with which they beat the bushes, looking for
wrens. The first to strike down one of these birds
was proclaimed King. Then they returned to the
town in procession, headed by the King, who carried
the wren on a pole. On the evening of the last day
of the year the King and all who had hunted the wren
marched through the streets of the town with torches
and music. At the door of every house they stopped,
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
and one of them wrote with chalk on the door <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>vive le
roi!</foreign> with the number of the year which was about
to begin. On the morning of Twelfth Day the King
again marched in procession with great pomp, wearing
a crown and a blue mantle and carrying a sceptre. In
front of him was borne the wren fastened to the top of
a pole, which was adorned with a wreath of olive, oak,
and mistletoe. After hearing high mass in the church,
surrounded by his officers and guards, he visited the
bishop, mayor, magistrates, and the chief inhabitants,
collecting money to defray the expenses of the royal
banquet which took place in the evening.<note place='foot'>Rolland, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. W.
Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
ii. 437 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Entraigues
men and boys used to hunt the wren on
Christmas Eve. When they caught one alive they
presented it to the priest, who, after the midnight
mass, set the bird free in the church. At Mirabeau
the priest blessed the bird. If the men failed to catch
a wren and the women succeeded in doing so, the
women had the right to mock and insult the men, and
to blacken their faces with mud and soot, if they
caught them.<note place='foot'>Rolland, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At La Ciotat, near Marseilles, a large
body of men armed with swords and pistols used to
hunt the wren every year about the end of December.
When a wren was caught it was hung on the middle
of a pole which two men carried, as if it were a heavy
burden. Thus they paraded round the town; the
bird was weighed in a great pair of scales; and then
the company sat down to table and made merry.<note place='foot'>Brand's <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, iii.
198. The <q>hunting of the wren</q>
may be compared with a Swedish
custom. On the 1st of May children
rob the magpies' nests of both eggs and
young. These they carry in a basket
from house to house in the village and
show them to the housewives, while
one of the children sings some doggerel
lines containing a threat that, if a
present is not given, the hens, chickens,
and eggs will fall a prey to the magpie.
They receive bacon, eggs, milk,
etc., upon which they afterwards feast.
L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>,
p. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The resemblance of such
customs to the <q>swallow song</q> and
<q>crow song</q> of the ancient Greeks (on
which see Athenaeus, pp. 359, 360) is
obvious and has been remarked before
now. Probably the Greek swallow-singers
and crow-singers carried about
dead swallows and crows or effigies of
them. In modern Greece it is said to
be still customary for children on 1st
March to go about the streets singing
spring songs and carrying a wooden
swallow, which is kept turning on a
cylinder. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 636.</note>
</p>

<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>

<p>
The parallelism between this custom of <q>hunting
the wren</q> and some of those we have considered,
especially the Gilyak procession with the bear, and
the Indian one with the snake, seems too close to allow
us to doubt that they all belong to the same circle of
ideas. The worshipful animal is killed with special
solemnity once a year; and before or immediately after
death, he is promenaded from door to door, that each
of his worshippers may receive a portion of the divine
virtues that are supposed to emanate from the dead or
dying god. Religious processions of this sort must
have had a great place in the ritual of European
peoples in prehistoric times, if we may judge from the
numerous traces of them which have survived in folk-custom.
A well-preserved specimen is the following,
which survived in the Highlands of Scotland
and in St. Kilda down to the latter half of last
century. <q>On the evening before New Year's Day,
it is usual for the cowherd and the young people
to meet together, and one of them is covered with a
cow's hide. The rest of the company are provided
with staves, to the end of which bits of raw hide are
tied. The person covered with the hide runs thrice
round the dwelling-house, <foreign rend='italic'>deiseil</foreign>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> according to the
course of the sun; the rest pursue, beating the hide
with their staves, and crying [here follows the Gaelic],
<q>Let us raise the noise louder and louder; let us beat
the hide.</q> They then come to the door of each
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
dwelling-house, and one of them repeats some verses
composed for the purpose. When admission is granted,
one of them pronounces within the threshold the
<foreign rend='italic'>beannachadthurlair</foreign>, or verses by which he pretends to
draw down a blessing upon the whole family [here
follows the Gaelic], <q>May God bless this house and
all that belongs to it, cattle, stones, and timber! In
plenty of meat, of bed and body-clothes, and health of
men, may it ever abound!</q> Then each burns in the
fire a little bit of hide which is tied to the end of the
staff. It is applied to the nose of every person and
domestic animal that belongs to the house. This, they
imagine, will tend much to secure them from diseases
and other misfortunes during the ensuing year. The
whole of the ceremony is called <foreign rend='italic'>colluinn</foreign>, from the
great noise which the hide makes.</q><note place='foot'>John Ramsay, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen
in the Eighteenth Century</hi>, ii. 438
sq.; cp. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Rhymes
of Scotland</hi>, p. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq</hi>.; Samuel Johnson,
<hi rend='italic'>Journey to the Western Islands of
Scotland</hi>, p. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (first American
edition, 1810). The custom is clearly
referred to in the <q>Penitential of
Theodore,</q> quoted by Kemble, <hi rend='italic'>Saxons
in England</hi>, i. 525; Elton, Origins of
English History, p. 411; <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis in
Kal. Januar. in cervulo vel vitula vadit,
id est in ferarum habitus se communicant,
et vestiuntur pellibus pecudum et
assumunt capita bestiarum</foreign>,</q> etc.</note> From another
authority,<note place='foot'>Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> we learn that the hide of which pieces were
burned in each house and applied to the inmates was
the breast part of a sheep-skin. Formerly, perhaps,
pieces of the cow-hide in which the man was clad were
detached for this purpose, just as in the Isle of Man a
feather of the wren used to be given to each household.
Similarly, as we have seen, the human victim whom
the Khonds slew as a divinity was taken from house
to house, and every one strove to obtain a relic of
his sacred person. Such customs are only another
form of that communion with the deity which is
attained most completely by eating the body and
drinking the blood of the god.
</p>

<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>

<p>
In the <q>hunting of the wren,</q> and the procession
with the man clad in a cow-skin, there is nothing to
show that the customs in question have any relation
to agriculture. So far as appears, they may date from
the pre-agricultural era when animals were revered as
divine in themselves, not merely as divine because they
embodied the corn-spirit; and the analogy of the
Gilyak procession of the bear, and the Indian procession
of the snake is in favour of assigning the corresponding
European customs to this very early date.
On the other hand, there are certain European processions
of animals, or of men disguised as animals,
which may possibly be purely agricultural in their
origin;<note place='foot'>Such are the Bohemian processions
at the Carnival when a man called the
Shrovetide Bear, swathed from head to
foot in peas-straw and sometimes
wearing a bear's mask, is led from
house to house. He dances with the
women of the house, and collects money
and food. Then they go to the alehouse,
where all the peasants assemble
with their wives. For at the Carnival,
especially on Shrove Tuesday, it is
necessary that every one should dance,
if the flax, the corn, and the vegetables
are to grow well. The higher they
leap the better will be the crops. Sometimes
the women pull out some of the
straw in which the Shrovetide Bear is
swathed, and put it in the nests of the
geese and fowls, believing that this will
make them lay well. Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>,
pp. 49-52. On similar customs,
see W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> pp. 183-200.</note> in other words, the animals which figure in
them may have been from the first nothing but representatives
of the corn-spirit conceived in animal shape.
But it is at least equally possible that these processions
originated in the pre-agricultural era, and have only
received an agricultural tinge from the environment
in which they have so long survived. But the question
is an obscure and difficult one, and cannot be
here discussed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='13. Transference of evil.'/>
<head>§ 13.&mdash;Transference of evil.</head>

<p>
The custom of killing the god has now been
proved to have been practised by peoples in the hunting,
pastoral, and agricultural stages of society, and the
various reasons for observing the custom have been
explained. One aspect of the custom still remains to
be noticed. The accumulated misfortunes and sins of
the whole people are sometimes laid upon the dying
god, who is supposed to bear them away for ever, leaving
the people innocent and happy. The notion that
we can transfer our pains and griefs to some other
being who will bear them in our stead is familiar to
the savage mind. It arises from a very obvious confusion
between the physical and the mental. Because
it is possible to transfer a load of wood, stones, or
what not, from our own back to the back of another,
the savage fancies that it is equally possible to transfer
the burden of his pains and sorrows to another, who will
suffer them in his stead. Upon this idea he acts, and
the result is an endless number of often very unamiable
devices for putting off upon some one else the trouble
which a man shrinks from bearing himself. Such
devices are amongst the most familiar facts in folk-lore;
but for the benefit of readers who are not professed
students of folk-lore, a few illustrations may be
given.
</p>

<p>
It is not necessary that the pain or trouble should
be transferred from the sufferer to a person; it may
equally well be transferred to an animal or a thing,
though in the last case the thing is often only a
vehicle to convey the trouble to the first person
who touches it. In some of the East Indian islands
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
epilepsy is believed to be cured by striking the patient
on the face with the leaves of certain trees and then
throwing the leaves away. The epilepsy is believed
to have passed into the leaves, and to have been
thrown away with them.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>,
pp. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 305, 357 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; cp. id. pp.
141, 340.</note> To cure toothache some
of the Australian blacks apply a heated spear-thrower
to the cheek. The spear-thrower is then cast away,
and the toothache goes with it, in the shape of a black
stone called <foreign rend='italic'>karriitch</foreign>. Stones of this kind are found
in old mounds and sandhills. They are carefully
collected and thrown in the direction of enemies, in
order to give them toothache.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 59.</note> When a Moor has
a headache, he will sometimes take a lamb or a goat
and beat it till it falls down, believing that the headache
will thus be transferred to the animal.<note place='foot'>Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 117.</note> After an
illness, a Bechuana king seated himself upon an ox
which lay stretched on the ground. The native
doctor next poured water on the king's head till
it ran down over his body. Then the head of the
ox was held in a vessel of water till the animal expired;
whereupon the doctor declared, and the people
believed, that the ox died of the king's disease, which
had been transferred to it from the king.<note place='foot'>John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South
Africa</hi> (second journey), ii. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the
Malagasy the vehicle for carrying away evils is called
a <foreign rend='italic'>faditra</foreign>. <q>The faditra is anything selected by the
sikidy [divining-board] for the purpose of taking away
any hurtful evils or diseases that might prove injurious
to an individual's happiness, peace, or prosperity. The
faditra may be either ashes, cut money, a sheep, a
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
pumpkin, or anything else the sikidy may choose to
direct. After the particular article is appointed, the
priest counts upon it all the evils that may prove
injurious to the person for whom it is made, and
which he then charges the faditra to take away for
ever. If the faditra be ashes, it is blown, to be
carried away by the wind. If it be cut money, it
is thrown to the bottom of deep water, or where
it can never be found. If it be a sheep, it is carried
away to a distance on the shoulders of a man, who
runs with all his might, mumbling as he goes, as if
in the greatest rage against the faditra for the evils
it is bearing away. If it be a pumpkin, it is carried
on the shoulders to a little distance, and there dashed
upon the ground with every appearance of fury and
indignation.</q><note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History of Madagascar</hi>, i.
422 <hi rend='italic'>sq</hi>.; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp. 232, 435, 436 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African Island</hi>, p.
303 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Malagasy was informed by a diviner
that he was doomed to a bloody death, but that
possibly he might avert his fate by performing a
certain rite. Carrying a small vessel full of blood
upon his head, he was to mount upon the back of a
bullock; while thus mounted, he was to spill the
blood upon the bullock's head, and then send the
animal away into the wilderness, whence it might
never return.<note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 374; Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit</hi>. p. 304; <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual
and Madagascar Magazine</hi>, iii. 263.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Battas of Sumatra have a ceremony which
they call <q>making the curse to fly away.</q> When
a woman is childless, a sacrifice is offered to the
gods of three grasshoppers, representing a head
of cattle, a buffalo, and a horse. Then a swallow
is set free, with a prayer that the curse may fall
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
upon the bird and fly away with it.<note place='foot'>Ködding, <q>Die Batakschen
Götter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>,
xii. (1885) 478.</note> At the cleansing
of a leper and of a house suspected of being tainted
with leprosy, the Jews let a bird fly away.<note place='foot'>Leviticus xiv. 7, 53. For a similar
use in Arabia see Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste
arabischen Heidentumes</hi>, p. 156; W.
Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>,
i. 402.</note> Amongst
the Miaotse of China, when the eldest son of the
house attains the age of seven years, a ceremony
called <q>driving away the devil</q> takes place. The
father makes a kite of straw and lets it fly away in
the desert, bearing away all evil with it.<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Parallele
und Vergleiche</hi>, p. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Morocco
most wealthy Moors keep a wild boar in their stables,
in order that the jinn and evil spirits may be diverted
from the horses and enter into the boar.<note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>,
p. 301.</note> The Dyaks
believe that certain men possess in themselves the
power of neutralising bad omens. So, when evil
omens have alarmed a farmer for the safety of his
crops, he takes a small portion of his farm produce
to one of these wise men, who eats it raw for a small
consideration, <q>and thereby appropriates to himself
the evil omen, which in him becomes innocuous, and
thus delivers the other from the ban of the <foreign rend='italic'>pemali</foreign>
or taboo.</q><note place='foot'>J. Perham, <q>Sea Dyak Religion,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Straits Branch Royal Asiatic
Soc.</hi> No. 10, p. 232.</note> In Travancore, when a Rajah is dangerously
ill and his life is despaired of, a holy Brahman
is brought, who closely embraces the King, and says,
<q>O King! I undertake to bear all your sins and
diseases. May your Highness live long and reign
happily.</q> Then the sin-bearer is sent away from the
country, and never allowed to return.<note place='foot'>S. Mateer, <hi rend='italic'>Native Life in Travancore</hi>,
p. 136.</note> Amongst the
Burghers or Badagas of the Neilgherry Hills in
Southern India, when a death has taken place, the
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
sins of the deceased are laid upon a buffalo calf. A
set form of confession of sins, the same for every one,
is recited aloud, then the calf is set free, and is never
afterwards used for common purposes. <q>The idea
of this ceremony is that the sins of the deceased enter
the calf, or that the task of his absolution is laid on it.
They say that the calf very soon disappears, and that
it is never after heard of.</q><note place='foot'>H. Harkness, <hi rend='italic'>Singular Aboriginal
Race of the Neilgherry Hills</hi>, p. 133;
Metz, <hi rend='italic'>The Tribes Inhabiting the Neilgherry
Hills</hi>, p. 78; Jagor, <q>Ueber
die Badagas im Nilgiri-Gebirge,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandl. d. Berlin. Gesell. f. Anthropol.</hi>
(1876), p. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For the
custom of letting a bullock go loose
after a death, compare also Grierson,
<hi rend='italic'>Bihar Peasant Life</hi>, p. 409; Ibbetson,
<hi rend='italic'>Settlement Report of the Panipat, Tahsil,
and Karnal Parganah of the Karnal
district</hi> (Allahabad, 1883) p. 137. In
the latter case it is said that the animal
is let loose <q>to become a pest.</q> Perhaps
the older idea was that the animal
carried away death from the survivors.
The idea of sin is not primitive.</note>
</p>

<p>
Similar attempts to shift the burden of disease and
sin from one's self to another person, or to an animal
or thing, have been common in ancient and modern
Europe. Grave writers of antiquity recommended
that, if a man be stung by a scorpion, he should sit
upon an ass with his face to the tail, or whisper in
the ear of the ass, <q>A scorpion has stung me</q>; in
either case, they thought, the pain would be transferred
from the man to the ass.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xiii. 9, xv. 1; Pliny,
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. § 155. The authorities
for these cures are respectively
Apuleius and Democritus. The latter
is probably not the atomic philosopher.
See <hi rend='italic'>Archaeological Review</hi>, i. 180,
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> A Roman cure for
fever was to pare the patient's nails, and stick the
parings with wax upon a neighbour's door before
sunrise; the fever then passed from the sick man
to his neighbour.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. § 86.</note> Similar devices must have been
practised by the Greeks; for in laying down laws
for his ideal state, Plato thinks it too much to expect
that men should not be alarmed at finding certain
wax figures adhering to their doors or to the tombstones
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
of their parents, or lying at cross-roads.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi>, xi. c. 12, p. 933 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> In
modern Europe there is no end to such devices.
Thus the Orkney Islanders will wash a sick person
and then throw the water down at a gateway, in the
belief that the sickness will leave the patient and be
transferred to the first person who passes through the
gate.<note place='foot'>Ch. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in Scotland</hi>,
iii. 226.</note> A Bavarian cure for the fever is to write
upon a piece of paper, <q>Fever, stay away, I am not at
home,</q> and to put the paper in some person's pocket.
The latter then catches the fever and the patient is rid
of it.<note place='foot'>G. Lammert, <hi rend='italic'>Volkmedizin und
medizinischer Aberglaube in Bayern</hi>, p.
264.</note> Another cure is for the patient to stick a twig
of the elder-tree in the ground without speaking. The
fever then adheres to the twig, and whoever pulls up
the twig will catch the disease.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 263.</note> To get rid of warts,
take a string and make as many knots in it as you
have warts. Then lay the string under a stone.
Whoever treads upon the stone will get the warts,
and you will be rid of them.<note place='foot'>Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und Sagen
aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>, i. § 85.</note> Gout may be transferred
from a man to a tree thus. Pare the nails of the
sufferer's fingers and clip some hairs from his legs.
Bore a hole in an oak, stuff the nails and hair in the
hole, stop up the hole again, and smear it with cow's
dung. If, for three months afterwards, the patient is
free of gout, then the oak has it in his stead.<note place='foot'>Carl Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Der Aberglaube des
Mittelalters</hi>, p. 104.</note> A
Flemish cure for the ague is to go early in the
morning to an old willow, tie three knots in one
of its branches, say, <q>Good-morrow, Old One, I
give thee the cold, good-morrow, Old One,</q> then
turn and run away without looking round.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
979.</note> A cure
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
current in Sunderland for a cough is to shave the
patient's head and hang the hair on a bush. When
the birds carry the hair to their nests, they will
carry the cough with it. A Northamptonshire and
Devonshire cure is to put a hair of the patient's
head between two slices of buttered bread and give
it to a dog. The dog will get the cough and the
patient will lose it.<note place='foot'>Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties</hi>, p. 143. Collections
of cures by transference will be
found in Strackerjan's work, cited above,
i. § 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. G. Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>,
ch. ii. Cp. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. c. 36.</note> In the Greek island of Carpathus
the priest ties a red thread round the neck of a sick
person. Next morning the friends of the patient
remove the thread and go out to the hillside, where
they tie the thread to a tree, thinking that they thus
transfer the sickness to the tree.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Blackwood's Magazine</hi>, February
1886, p. 239.</note>
</p>

<p>
The old Welsh custom known as <q>sin-eating</q> is
another example of the supposed transference of evil
from one person to another. According to Aubrey,
<q>In the County of Hereford was an old Custome at
funeralls to hire poor people, who were to take upon
them all the sinnes of the party deceased. One of
them, I remember, lived in a cottage on Rosse-high way
(he was a long, leane, ugly, lamentable poor raskal).
The manner was that when the Corps was brought out
of the house and layd on the Biere; a Loafe of bread was
brought out, and delivered to the Sinne-eater over the
corps, as also a Mazar-bowle of maple (Gossips bowle)
full of beer, which he was to drinke up, and sixpence in
money, in consideration whereof he took upon him
(ipso facto) all the Sinnes of the Defunct, and freed him
(or her) from walking after they were dead.... I
believe this custom was heretofore used over all
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
Wales.... In North Wales the Sinne-eaters are frequently
made use of; but there, instead of a Bowle
of Beere, they have a bowle of Milke.</q><note place='foot'>Aubrey, <hi rend='italic'>Remains of Gentilisme and
Judaisme</hi> (Folk-lore Society, 1881), p.
35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> According to
a letter dated February 1, 1714-5, <q>within the memory
of our fathers, in Shropshire, in those villages adjoyning
to Wales, when a person dyed, there was notice given
to an old sire (for so they called him), who presently
repaired to the place where the deceased lay, and stood
before the door of the house, when some of the family
came out and furnished him with a cricket, on which
he sat down facing the door. Then they gave him a
groat, which he put in his pocket; a crust of bread,
which he eat; and a full bowle of ale, which he drank
off at a draught. After this he got up from the cricket
and pronounced, with a composed gesture, the ease
and rest of the soul departed for which he would pawn
his own soul. This I had from the ingenious John
Aubrey, Esq.</q><note place='foot'>Bagford's letter in Leland's <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi>,
i. 76, quoted by Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, Bohn's
ed.</note> In recent years some doubt has been
thrown on Aubrey's account of the custom.<note place='foot'>In the <hi rend='italic'>Academy</hi>, 13th Nov. 1875, p.
505, Mr. D. Silvan Evans stated that he
knew of no such custom anywhere in
Wales; and Miss Burne knows no
example of it in Shropshire. Burne
and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi>, p.
307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
practice, however, is reported to have prevailed in
a valley not far from Llandebie to a recent period.
An instance was said to have occurred about forty
years ago.<note place='foot'>The authority for the statement is
a Mr. Moggridge, reported in <hi rend='italic'>Archaeologia
Cambrensis</hi>, second series, iii.
330. But Mr. Moggridge did not
speak from personal knowledge, and as
he appears to have taken it for granted
that the practice of placing bread and
salt upon the breast of a corpse was a
survival of the custom of <q>sin-eating,</q>
his evidence must be received with
caution. He repeated his statement, in
somewhat vaguer terms, at a meeting
of the Anthropological Institute, 14th
December 1875. See <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop.
Inst</hi>. v. 423 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Aubrey's statement is supported by the
analogy of similar customs in India. When the Rajah
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
of Tanjore died in 1801, some of his bones and the
bones of the two wives, who were burned with his
corpse, were ground to powder and eaten, mixed with
boiled rice, by twelve Brahmans. It was believed that
the sins of the deceased passed into the bodies of
the Brahmans, who were paid for the service.<note place='foot'>Dubois, <hi rend='italic'>Moeurs des Peuples de
l'Inde</hi>, ii. 32.</note> A
Brahman, resident in a village near Raipúr, stated
that he had eaten food (rice and milk) out of the hand
of the dead Rajah of Biláspúr, and that in consequence
he had been placed on the throne for the space of
a year. At the end of the year he had been given
presents and then turned out of the territory and
forbidden apparently to return. He was an outcast
among his fellows for having eaten out of a dead man's
hand.<note place='foot'>R. Richardson, in <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes
and Queries</hi>, i. No. 674.</note> A similar custom is believed to obtain among
the hill states about Kángrá, and to have given rise
to a caste of <q>outcaste</q> Brahmans. At the funeral
of a Rání of Chambá rice and <foreign rend='italic'>ghí</foreign> were eaten out
of the hands of the corpse by a Brahman paid for
the purpose. Afterwards a stranger, who had been
caught outside the Chambá territory, was given the
costly wrappings of the corpse, then told to depart
and never show his face in the country again.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. No.
674; ii. No. 559. Some of these customs
have been already referred to in a
different connection. See above, vol. i.
p. 232.</note> In
Oude when an infant was killed it used to be buried
in the room in which it had been born. On the
thirteenth day afterwards the priest had to cook and
eat his food in that room. By doing so he was
supposed to take the whole sin upon himself and to
cleanse the family from it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> iii. No. 745.</note> At Utch Kurgan in
Turkistan Mr. Schuyler saw an old man who was said
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
to get his living by taking on himself the sins of
the dead and thenceforth devoting his life to prayer
for their souls.<note place='foot'>E. Schuyler, <hi rend='italic'>Turkistan</hi>, ii. 28.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='14. Expulsion of evils.'/>
<head>§ 14.&mdash;Expulsion of evils,</head>

<p>
These examples illustrate the primitive principle of
the transference of ills to another person, animal, or
thing. In the instances cited the principle is applied
for the benefit of individuals only. But analogous
proceedings are employed by barbarous peoples to
rid a whole community of all their troubles at a
blow. The frame of mind which prompts such wholesale
clearances of evil may be described in the language
of Mr. Im Thurn, for though he wrote of the Indians
of Guiana in particular, his description is capable of a
much wider application. He says: <q>Thus the whole
world of the Indian swarms with these [spiritual]
beings. If by a mighty mental effort we could for
a moment revert to a similar mental position we
should find ourselves surrounded by a host of possibly
hurtful beings, so many in number that to describe
them as innumerable would fall ridiculously short of
the truth. It is not therefore wonderful that the
Indian fears to move beyond the light of his camp-fire
after dark, or, if he is obliged to do so, carries a
firebrand with him that he may at least see among
what enemies he walks; nor is it wonderful that
occasionally the air round the settlement seems to
the Indian to grow so full of beings that a peaiman
[sorcerer], who is supposed to have the power of
temporarily driving them away, is employed to effect a
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
general clearance of these beings, if only for a time.</q><note place='foot'>E. F. im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Indians of
Guiana</hi>, p. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Such general clearances of evil influences may be
divided into two classes, according as the expelled evils
are immaterial and invisible or are embodied in a
material vehicle or scapegoat. The former may be
called the direct or immediate expulsion of evils; the
latter the indirect or mediate expulsion, or the expulsion
by scapegoat. We begin with examples of the
former.
</p>

<p>
In the island of Rook, between New Guinea and
New Britain, when any misfortune has happened, all
the people run together, scream, curse, howl, and beat
the air with sticks to drive away the devil (<foreign rend='italic'>Marsába</foreign>),
who is supposed to be the author of the mishap.
From the spot where the mishap took place they drive
him step by step to the sea, and on reaching the shore
they redouble their shouts and blows in order to expel
him from the island. He generally retires to the sea
or to the island of Lottin.<note place='foot'>Paul Reina, <q>Ueber die Bewohner
der Insel Rook,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für allgemeine
Erdkunde</hi>, N. F. iv. 356.</note> The natives of New
Britain ascribe sickness, drought, the failure of crops,
and in short all misfortunes, to the influence of wicked
spirits. So at times when many people sicken and
die, as at the beginning of the rainy season, all the
inhabitants of a district, armed with branches and
clubs, go out by moonlight to the fields, where they
beat and stamp on the ground with wild howls till
morning, believing that this drives away the devils.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Im Bismarck-Archipel</hi>,
p. 142.</note>
When a village has been visited by a series of disasters
or a severe epidemic, the Minahassa of Celebes lay
the blame upon the devils who are infesting the village
and must be expelled from it. Accordingly, early one
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
morning all the people, men, women, and children,
quit their homes, carrying their household goods with
them, and take up their quarters in temporary huts
which have been erected outside the village. Here
they spend several days, offering sacrifices and preparing
for the final ceremony. At last the men, some
wearing masks, others with their faces blackened, and
so on, but all armed with swords, guns, pikes, or
brooms, steal cautiously and silently back to the
deserted village. Then, at a signal from the priest,
they rush furiously up and down the streets and into
and under the houses (which are raised on piles above
the ground), yelling and striking on walls, doors, and
windows, to drive away the devils. Next, the priests
and the rest of the people come with the holy fire and
march nine times round each house and thrice round
the ladder that leads up to it, carrying the fire with
them. Then they take the fire into the kitchen, where
it must burn for three days continuously. The devils
are now driven away, and great and general is the joy.<note place='foot'>[P. N. Wilken], <q>De godsdienst
en godsdienstplegtigheden der Alfoeren
in de Menahassa op het eiland Celebes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië</hi>,
December 1849, pp. 392-394; id.,
<q>Bijdragen tot de kennis van de
zeden en gewoonten der Alfoeren in
de Minahassa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen v. w.
het Nederland. Zendelinggenootsch</hi>. vii.
(1863) 149 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. G. F. Riedel,
<q>De Minahasa in 1825,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xviii. (1872), 521 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Wilken's
first and fuller account is reprinted
in Graafland's <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi>, i. 117-120.</note>
The Alfoers of Halmahera attribute epidemics to the
devil who comes from other villages to carry them off.
So, in order to rid the village of the disease, the
sorcerer drives away the devil. From all the villagers
he receives a costly garment and places it on four
vessels, which he takes to the forest and leaves at the
spot where the devil is supposed to be. Then with
mocking words he bids the demon abandon the place.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <q>Galela und Tobeloresen,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift f. Ethnologie</hi>, xvii. (1885)
82; G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Het Shamanisme
bij de Volken van de Indischen Archipel</hi>,
p. 58.</note>
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
In the Key Islands, south of New Guinea, when
sickness prevails, the people erect a stage on the
shore and load it with meat and drink. Then the
priest in presence of the people bans the spirits which
are causing the disease, whereupon the people run
back to the village at full speed, like fugitives.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
239.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the island of Nias, when a man is seriously ill
and other remedies have been tried in vain, the sorcerer
proceeds to exorcise the devil who is causing the illness.
A pole is set up in front of the house, and from
the top of the pole a rope of palm-leaves is stretched
to the roof of the house. Then the sorcerer mounts
the roof with a pig, which he kills and allows to roll
from the roof to the ground. The devil, anxious to
get the pig, lets himself down hastily from the roof by
the rope of palm-leaves, and a good spirit, invoked by
the sorcerer, prevents him from climbing up again. If
this remedy fails, it is believed that other devils must
still be lurking in the house. So a general hunt is
made after them. All the doors and windows in the
house are closed, except a single dormer-window in the
roof. The men, shut up in the house, hew and slash
with their swords right and left to the clash of gongs
and the rub-a-dub of drums. Terrified at this onslaught
the devils escape by the dormer-window, and sliding
down the rope of palm-leaves take themselves off. As
all the doors and windows, except the one in the roof,
are shut, the devils cannot get into the house again.
In the case of an epidemic the proceedings are similar.
All the gates of the village, except one, are closed;
every voice is raised, every gong and drum beaten,
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
every sword brandished. Thus the devils are driven
out and the last gate is shut behind them. For eight
days thereafter the village is in a state of siege, no one
being allowed to enter it.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias</hi>,
p. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische
Archipel</hi>, p. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. Chatelin,
<q>Godsdienst en Bijgeloof der Niassers,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi. 139. The Dyaks
also drive the devil at the point of the
sword from a house where there is sickness.
See Hupe, <q>Korte verhandeling
over de godsdienst, zeden, enz. der
Dajakkers</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrland's
Indië</hi>, viii. (1846) dl. iii. p. 149.</note> When cholera has broken
out in a Burmese village the able-bodied men scramble
on the roofs and lay about them with bamboos and billets
of wood, while all the rest of the population, old and
young, stand below and thump drums, blow trumpets,
yell, scream, beat floors, walls, tin-pans, everything to
make a din. This uproar, repeated on three successive
nights, is thought to be very effective in driving away
the cholera demons.<note place='foot'>Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British Burma</hi>, p. 233;
Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, i. 282, ii.
105 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, ii. 98.</note> When small-pox first appeared
amongst the Kumis of South-Eastern India, they
thought it was a devil come from Arracan. The villages
were placed in a state of siege, no one being
allowed to leave or enter them. A monkey was killed
by being dashed on the ground, and its body was hung
at the village gate. Its blood, mixed with small river
pebbles, was sprinkled on the houses, the threshold of
every house was swept with the monkey's tail, and the
fiend was adjured to depart.<note place='foot'>Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Tribes of South-Eastern
India</hi>, p. 226.</note> At Great Bassam, in
Guinea, the French traveller Hecquard witnessed the
exorcism of the evil spirit who was believed to make
women barren. The women who wished to become
mothers offered to the fetish wine-vessels or statuettes
representing women suckling children. Then being
assembled in the fetish hut, they were sprinkled with
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
rum by the priest, while young men fired guns and
brandished swords to drive away the demon.<note place='foot'>Hecquard, <hi rend='italic'>Reise an die Küste und
in das Innere von West Afrika</hi>, p. 43.</note> When
sickness was prevalent in a Huron village, and all
other remedies had been tried in vain, the Indians had
recourse to the ceremony called <foreign rend='italic'>Lonouyroya</foreign>, <q>which
is the principal invention and most proper means, so
they say, to expel from the town or village the devils
and evil spirits which cause, induce, and import all the
maladies and infirmities which they suffer in body and
mind.</q> Accordingly, one evening the men would
begin to rush like madmen about the village, breaking
and upsetting whatever they came across in the wigwams.
They threw fire and burning brands about the
streets, and all night long they ran howling and singing
without cessation. Then they all dreamed of something,
a knife, dog, skin, or whatever it might be, and when
morning came they went from wigwam to wigwam
asking for presents. These they received silently, till
the particular thing was given them which they had
dreamed about. On receiving it they uttered a cry of
joy and rushed from the hut, amid the congratulations
of all present. The health of those who received
what they had dreamed of was believed to be assured;
whereas those who did not get what they had set their
hearts upon regarded their fate as sealed.<note place='foot'>Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le Grand Voyage du Pays
des Hurons</hi>, p. 279 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> of the
Paris reprint). Compare <hi rend='italic'>Relations des
Jésuites</hi>, 1639, pp. 88-92 (Canadian
reprint), from which it appears that
each man demanded the subject of his
dream in the form of a riddle, which
the hearers tried to solve. The propounding
of riddles is not uncommon
as a superstitious observance. Probably
enigmas were originally a kind of
divination. Cp. Vambery, <hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi>,
p. 232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluiken
kroesharige rassen</hi>, etc. p. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
In Bolang Mongondo (Celebes) riddles
may never be asked except when there
is a corpse in the village. N. P.
Wilken en J. A. Schwarz, <q>Allerlei
over het land en volk van Bolaäng
Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege
het Nederlandsch. Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 357.</note>
</p>

<p>
The observance of such ceremonies, from being
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
occasional, tends to become periodic. It comes to be
thought desirable to have a general riddance of evil
spirits at fixed times, usually once a year, in order
that the people may make a fresh start in life, freed
from all the malignant influences which have been long
accumulating about them. Some of the Australian
blacks annually expelled the ghosts of the dead from
their territory. The ceremony was witnessed by the
Rev. W. Ridley on the banks of the river Barwan. <q>A
chorus of twenty, old and young, were singing and
beating time with boomerangs.... Suddenly, from
under a sheet of bark darted a man with his body
whitened by pipeclay, his head and face coloured with
lines of red and yellow, and a tuft of feathers fixed by
means of a stick two feet above the crown of his head.
He stood twenty minutes perfectly still, gazing upwards.
An aboriginal who stood by told me he was
looking for the ghosts of dead men. At last he began
to move very slowly, and soon rushed to and fro at full
speed, flourishing a branch as if to drive away some
foes invisible to us. When I thought this pantomime
must be almost over, ten more, similarly adorned, suddenly
appeared from behind the trees, and the whole
party joined in a brisk conflict with their mysterious
assailants.... At last, after some rapid evolutions in
which they put forth all their strength, they rested from
the exciting toil which they had kept up all night and
for some hours after sunrise: they seemed satisfied
that the ghosts were driven away for twelve months.
They were performing the same ceremony at every
station along the river, and I am told it is an annual
custom.</q><note place='foot'>The Rev. W. Ridley, in J. D. Lang's <hi rend='italic'>Queensland</hi>, p. 441; cp. Ridley,
<hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi</hi>, p. 149.</note>
</p>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
Certain seasons of the year mark themselves naturally
out as appropriate moments for a general expulsion
of devils. Such a moment occurs towards the close of
an Arctic winter, when the sun reappears on the horizon
after an absence of weeks or months. Accordingly, at
Point Barrow, the most northerly extremity of Alaska,
and nearly of America, the Eskimo choose the moment
of the sun's reappearance to hunt the mischievous spirit
Tuña from every house. The ceremony was witnessed
a few years ago by the members of the United States
Polar Expedition, who wintered at Point Barrow.
A fire was built in front of the council-house, and an
old woman was posted at the entrance to every <foreign rend='italic'>iglu</foreign>
(Eskimo house). The men gathered round the council-fire,
while the young women and girls drove the spirits
out of every <foreign rend='italic'>iglu</foreign> with their knives, stabbing viciously
under the bunk and deer-skins, and calling upon Tuña
to leave the <foreign rend='italic'>iglu</foreign>. When they thought he had been
driven out of every hole and corner, they thrust him
down through the hole in the floor and chased him
into the open air with loud cries and frantic gestures.
Meanwhile the old woman at the entrance of the <foreign rend='italic'>iglu</foreign>
made passes with a long knife in the air to keep him
from returning. Each party drove the spirit towards
the fire and invited him to go into it. All were by
this time drawn up in a semicircle round the fire, when
several of the leading men made specific charges against
the spirit; and each after his speech brushed his clothes
violently, calling on the spirit to leave him and go into
the fire. Two men now stepped forward with rifles
loaded with blank cartridges, while a third brought a
vessel of urine and flung it on the fire. At the same
time one of the men fired a shot into the fire; and as
the cloud of steam rose it received the other shot,
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
which was supposed to finish Tuña for the time being.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Report of the International Polar
Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska</hi>
(Washington, 1885), p. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In autumn, when heavy gales are raging, the Eskimo
of Baffin Land think that the female spirit Sedna dwells
amongst them, and the most powerful enchanter is
employed to drive her out. Beside a small hole in
the centre of the floor a line of seal-skin is coiled up.
Holding a sealing-spear in his left hand the enchanter
watches the hole in the floor. Another sorcerer
sits in the rear of the hut chanting songs to attract
Sedna. Now she is heard approaching under the floor
of the hut. When she reaches the hole the enchanter
strikes her with his harpoon and pays out the line. A
severe struggle ensues, but ultimately Sedna flies to
her country, Adlivun. The performance is cleverly
managed. When the harpoon is drawn out of the hole
it is covered with blood, and the heavy breathing of
Sedna can be distinctly heard under the floor.<note place='foot'>Franz Boas, <q>The Eskimo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
and Transactions of the Royal
Society of Canada for 1887</hi>, vol. v.
(Montreal, 1888), sect. ii. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The Iroquois inaugurated the new year in January,
February, or March (the time varied) with a <q>festival
of dreams</q> like that which the Hurons observed on
special occasions.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</note> The whole ceremonies lasted
several days, or even weeks, and formed a kind of
Saturnalia. Men and women, variously disguised,
went from wigwam to wigwam smashing and throwing
down whatever they came across. It was a time of
general licence; the people were supposed to be out
of their senses, and therefore not to be responsible
for what they did. Accordingly, many seized the
opportunity of paying off old scores by belabouring
obnoxious persons, drenching them with ice-cold
water, and covering them with filth or hot ashes.
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
Others seized burning brands or coals and flung them
at the heads of the first persons they met. The only
way of escaping from these persecutors was to guess
what they had dreamed of. On one day of the festival
the ceremony of driving away evil spirits from the
village took place. Men clothed in the skins of wild
beasts, their faces covered with hideous masks, and
their hands with the shell of the tortoise, went from
hut to hut making frightful noises; in every hut they
took the fuel from the fire and scattered the embers
and ashes about the floor with their hands. The
general confession of sins which preceded the festival
was probably a preparation for the public expulsion of
evil influences; it was a way of stripping the people of
their moral burdens, that these might be collected and
cast out. This New Year festival is still celebrated
by some of the heathen Iroquois, though it has been
shorn of its former turbulence. A conspicuous feature
in the ceremony is now the sacrifice of the White Dog,
but this appears to have been added to the festival
in comparatively modern times, and does not figure
in the oldest descriptions of the ceremonies. We
shall return to it later on.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, vi. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Timothy Dwight,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels in New England and New
York</hi>, iv. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. H. Morgan,
<hi rend='italic'>League of the Iroquois</hi>, p. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Mrs.
E. A. Smith, <q>Myths of the Iroquois,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Second Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1883), p. 112
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Horatio Hale, <q>Iroquois sacrifice
of the White Dog,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American Antiquarian</hi>,
vii. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. M. Beauchamp,
<q>Iroquois White Dog feast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>
p. 235 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> A great annual festival
of the Cherokee Indians was the Propitiation,
<q>Cementation,</q> or Purification festival. <q>It was celebrated
shortly after the first new moon of autumn, and
consisted of a multiplicity of rigorous rites, fastings,
ablutions, and purifications. Among the most important
functionaries on the occasion were seven
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
exorcisers or cleansers, whose duty it was, at a certain
stage of the proceedings, to drive away evil, and
purify the town. Each one bore in his hand a white
rod of sycamore. <q>The leader, followed by the others,
walked around the national heptagon, and coming to
the treasure or store-house to the west of it, they lashed
the eaves of the roofs with their rods. The leader
then went to another house, followed by the others,
singing, and repeated the same ceremony until every
house was purified.</q> This ceremony was repeated
daily during the continuance of the festival. In performing
their ablutions they went into the water and
allowed their old clothes to be carried away by the
stream, by which means they supposed their impurities
removed.</q><note place='foot'>Squier's notes upon Bartram's
<hi rend='italic'>Creek and Cherokee Indians</hi>, p. 78,
from the MS. of Mr. Payne. See above,
p. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In September the Incas of Peru celebrated a
festival called Situa, the object of which was to banish
from the capital and its vicinity all disease and
troubles. The festival fell in September because the
rains begin about this time, and with the first rains
there was generally much sickness. As a preparation
for the festival the people fasted on the first day of
the moon after the autumnal equinox. Having fasted
during the day, and the night being come, they baked
a coarse paste of maize. This paste was made of two
sorts. One was kneaded with the blood of children
aged five to ten years, the blood being obtained by
bleeding the children between the eye-brows. These
two kinds of paste were baked separately, because
they were for different uses. Each family assembled
at the house of the eldest brother to celebrate the
feast; and those who had no elder brother went to
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
the house of their next relation of greater age. On
the same night all who had fasted during the day
washed their bodies, and taking a little of the blood-kneaded
paste, rubbed it over their head, face, breast,
shoulders, arms, and legs. They did this in order
that the paste might take away all their infirmities.
After this the head of the family anointed the
threshold with the same paste, and left it there as a
token that the inmates of the house had performed
their ablutions and cleansed their bodies. Meantime
the High Priest performed the same ceremonies in the
temple of the Sun. As soon as the Sun rose, all the
people worshipped and besought him to drive all evils
out of the city, and then they broke their fast with the
paste that had been kneaded without blood. When
they had paid their worship and broken their fast,
which they did at a stated hour, in order that all might
adore the Sun as one man, an Inca of the blood royal
came forth from the fortress, as a messenger of the
Sun, richly dressed, with his mantle girded round his
body, and a lance in his hand. The lance was decked
with feathers of many hues, extending from the blade
to the socket, and fastened with rings of gold. He
ran down the hill from the fortress brandishing his
lance, till he reached the centre of the great square,
where stood the golden urn, like a fountain, that was
used for the sacrifice of <foreign rend='italic'>chicha</foreign>. Here four other Incas
of the blood royal awaited him, each with a lance in
his hand, and his mantle girded up to run. The
messenger touched their four lances with his lance,
and told them that the Sun bade them, as his messengers,
drive the evils out of the city. The four
Incas then separated and ran down the four royal
roads which led out of the city to the four quarters of
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
the world. While they ran, all the people, great and
small, came to the doors of their houses, and with
great shouts of joy and gladness shook their clothes,
as if they were shaking off dust, while they cried,
<q>Let the evils be gone. How greatly desired has
this festival been by us. O Creator of all things, permit
us to reach another year, that we may see another
feast like this.</q> After they had shaken their clothes,
they passed their hands over their heads, faces, arms,
and legs, as if in the act of washing. All this was
done to drive the evils out of their houses, that the
messengers of the Sun might banish them from the
city. This was done not only in the streets through
which the Incas ran, but generally in all quarters of
the city. Moreover, they all danced, the Inca himself
amongst them, and bathed in the rivers and fountains,
saying that their maladies would come out of them.
Then they took great torches of straw, bound round
with cords. These they lighted, and passed from one
to the other, striking each other with them, and saying,
<q>Let all harm go away.</q> Meanwhile the runners
ran with their lances for a quarter of a league outside
the city, where they found four other Incas ready, who
received the lances from their hands and ran with
them. Thus the lances were carried by relays of
runners for a distance of five or six leagues, at the end
of which the runners washed themselves and their
weapons in rivers, and set up the lances, in sign of a
boundary within which the banished evils might not
return.<note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>Royal Commentaries
of the Yncas</hi>, pt. i. bk. vii. ch.
6, vol. ii. p. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, Markham's translation;
Molina, <q>Fables and Rites of
the Yncas,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Rites and Laws of the
Yncas</hi> (Hakluyt Society, 1873), p. 20
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Indies</hi>, bk.
v. ch. 28, vol. ii. p. 375 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Hakluyt
Society, 1880). The accounts of
Garcilasso and Molina are somewhat
discrepant, but this may be explained
by the statement of the latter that <q>in
one year they added, and in another
they reduced the number of ceremonies,
according to circumstances.</q> Molina
places the festival in August, Garcilasso
and Acosta in September. According
to Garcilasso there were only four
runners in Cuzco; according to Molina
there were four hundred. Acosta's
account is very brief. In the description
given in the text features have been
borrowed from all three accounts, where
these seemed consistent with each
other.</note>
</p>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<p>
The negroes of Guinea annually banish the devil
from all their towns with much ceremony. At Axim,
on the Gold Coast, this annual expulsion is preceded
by a feast of eight days, during which mirth and jollity
reign, and <q>a perfect lampooning liberty is allowed,
and scandal so highly exalted, that they may freely
sing of all the faults, villanies, and frauds of their
superiors as well as inferiors, without punishment, or
so much as the least interruption.</q> On the eighth
day they hunt out the devil with a dismal cry, running
after him and pelting him with sticks, stones, and
whatever comes to hand. When they have driven
him far enough out of the town, they all return. In
this way he is driven out of more than a hundred
towns at the same time. To make sure that he does
not return to their houses, the women wash and scour
all their wooden and earthen vessels, <q>to free them
from all uncleanness and the devil.</q><note place='foot'>Bosman's <q>Guinea,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi. 402. Cp.
Pierre Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves</hi>,
p. 395.</note> At Onitsha,
on the Quorra River, Mr. J. C. Taylor witnessed the
celebration of New Year's Day by the negroes. It
fell on 20th December 1858. Every family brought a
firebrand out into the street, threw it away, and
exclaimed as they returned, <q>The gods of the new
year! New Year has come round again.</q> Mr.
Taylor adds, <q>The meaning of the custom seems to
be that the fire is to drive away the old year with its
sorrows and evils, and to embrace the new year with
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
hearty reception.</q><note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor. <hi rend='italic'>The
Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi>, p. 320.</note> Of all Abyssinian festivals that of
Mascal or the Cross is celebrated with the greatest
pomp. The eve of the festival witnesses a ceremony
which doubtless belongs to the world-wide class of
customs we are dealing with. At sunset a discharge
of firearms takes place from all the principal houses.
<q>Then every one provides himself with a torch, and
during the early part of the night bonfires are kindled,
and the people parade the town, carrying their lighted
torches in their hands. They go through their houses
too, poking a light into every dark corner in the hall,
under the couches, in the stables, kitchen, etc., as if
looking for something lost, and calling out, <q>Akho,
akhoky! turn out the spinage, and bring in the porridge;
Mascal is come!</q>.... After this they play,
and poke fun and torches at each other.</q><note place='foot'>Mansfield Parkyns, <hi rend='italic'>Life in
Abyssinia</hi>, p. 285 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the date of the annual expulsion of
devils is fixed with reference to the agricultural
seasons. Among the Hos of North-Eastern India
the great festival of the year is the harvest home,
held in January, when the granaries are full of
grain, and the people, to use their own expression,
are full of devilry. <q>They have a strange notion
that at this period men and women are so overcharged
with vicious propensities, that it is absolutely
necessary for the safety of the person to let off steam
by allowing for a time full vent to the passions.</q> The
ceremonies open with a sacrifice to the village god of
three fowls, two of which must be black. Along with
them are offered flowers of the Palás tree, bread made
from rice-flour, and sesamum seeds. These offerings
are presented by the village priest, who prays that
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
during the year about to begin they and their children
may be preserved from all misfortune and sickness,
and that they may have seasonable rain and good
crops. Prayer is also made in some places for the
souls of the dead. At this time an evil spirit is supposed
to infest the place, and to get rid of it men,
women, and children go in procession round and
through every part of the village with sticks in their
hands, as if beating for game, singing a wild chant,
and shouting vociferously, till they feel assured that
the evil spirit must have fled. Then they give themselves
up to feasting and drinking rice-beer, till they
are in a fit state for the wild debauch which follows.
The festival now <q>becomes a saturnale, during which
servants forget their duty to their masters, children
their reverence for parents, men their respect for
women, and women all notions of modesty, delicacy,
and gentleness; they become raging bacchantes.</q>
Usually the Hos are quiet and reserved in manner,
decorous and gentle to women. But during this
festival <q>their nature appears to undergo a temporary
change. Sons and daughters revile their parents in
gross language, and parents their children; men and
women become almost like animals in the indulgence
of their amorous propensities.</q> The Mundaris, kinsmen
and neighbours of the Hos, keep the festival in
much the same manner. <q>The resemblance to a
Saturnale is very complete, as at this festival the farm
labourers are feasted by their masters, and allowed the
utmost freedom of speech in addressing them. It is
the festival of the harvest home; the termination of
one year's toil, and a slight respite from it before they
commence again.</q><note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<p>
Amongst some of the Hindoo Koosh tribes,
as among the Hos and Mundaris, the expulsion
of devils takes place after harvest. When the last
crop of autumn has been got in, it is thought necessary
to drive away evil spirits from the granaries. A
kind of porridge called <foreign rend='italic'>mool</foreign> is eaten, and the head
of the family takes his matchlock and fires it into the
floor. Then, going outside, he sets to work loading
and firing till his powder horn is exhausted, while all
his neighbours are similarly employed. The next day
is spent in rejoicings. In Chitral this festival is called
<q>devil-driving.</q><note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</hi>, p. 103.</note> On the other hand the Khonds of
India expel the devils at seed-time instead of at
harvest. At this time they worship Pitteri Pennu, the
god of increase and of gain in every shape. On the
first day of the festival a rude car is made of a basket
set upon a few sticks, tied upon bamboo rollers for
wheels. The priest takes this car first to the house of
the lineal head of the tribe, to whom precedence is given
in all ceremonies connected with agriculture. Here he
receives a little of each kind of seed and some feathers.
He then takes the car to all the other houses in the
village, each of which contributes the same things.
Lastly, the car is conducted to a field without the
village, attended by all the young men, who beat each
other and strike the air violently with long sticks.
The seed thus carried out is called the share of the
<q>evil spirits, spoilers of the seed.</q> <q>These are considered
to be driven out with the car; and when it
and its contents are abandoned to them, they are held
to have no excuse for interfering with the rest of the
seed-corn.</q> Next day each household kills a hog over
the seed for the year, and prays to Pitteri Pennu.
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
The elders then feast upon the hogs. The young
men are excluded from the repast, but enjoy the privilege
of waylaying and pelting with jungle fruit their
elders as they return from the feast. Upon the third
day the lineal head of the tribe goes out and sows his
seed, after which all the rest may do so.<note place='foot'>W. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>Memorials of
Service in India</hi>, p. 357 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Possibly
this case belongs more strictly to the
class of mediate expulsions, the devils
being driven out upon the car. Perhaps,
however, the car with its contents
is regarded rather as a bribe to induce
them to go than as a vehicle in which
they are actually carted away. Anyhow
it is convenient to take this case
along with those other expulsions of
demons which are the accompaniment
of an agricultural festival.</note>
</p>

<p>
The people of Bali, an island to the east of Java,
have periodical expulsions of devils upon a great scale.
Generally the time chosen for the expulsion is the day
of the <q>dark moon</q> in the ninth month. When the
demons have been long unmolested the country is said
to be <q>warm,</q> and the priest issues orders to expel
them by force, lest the whole of Bali should be
rendered uninhabitable. On the day appointed the
people of the village or district assemble at the
principal temple. Here at a cross-road offerings are
set out for the devils. After prayers have been recited
by the priests, the blast of a horn summons the devils
to partake of the meal which has been prepared for
them. At the same time a number of men step
forward and light their torches at the holy lamp which
burns before the chief priest. Immediately afterwards,
followed by the bystanders, they spread in all directions
and march through the streets and lanes crying,
<q>Depart! go away!</q> Wherever they pass, the
people who have stayed at home hasten by a deafening
knocking on doors, beams, rice-blocks, etc., to take
their share in the expulsion of devils. Thus chased
from the houses, the fiends flee to the banquet which
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
has been set out for them; but here the priest receives
them with curses which finally drive them
from the district. When the last devil has taken his
departure, the uproar is succeeded by a dead silence,
which lasts during the next day also. The devils, it is
thought, are anxious to return to their old homes, and
in order to make them think that Bali is not Bali but
some desert island, no one may stir from his own
premises for twenty-four hours. Even ordinary
household work, including cooking, is discontinued.
Only the watchmen may show themselves in the
streets. Wreaths of thorns and leaves are hung at all
the entrances to warn strangers from entering. Not
till the third day is this state of siege raised, and even
then it is forbidden to work at the rice-fields or to buy
and sell in the market. Most people still stay at home,
striving to while away the time with cards and dice.<note place='foot'>R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het
eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, N. S. viii. (1879) 58-60.
Van Eck's account is reprinted
in J. Jacobs's <hi rend='italic'>Eenigen tijd onder de
Baliërs</hi> (Batavia, 1883), p. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In some parts of Fiji an annual ceremony took place
which has much the aspect of an expulsion of devils.
The time of its celebration was determined by the
appearance of a certain fish or sea-slug (<foreign rend='italic'>balolo</foreign>) which
swarms out in dense shoals from the coral reefs on a
single day of the year, usually in the last quarter of the
moon in November. The appearance of the sea-slugs
was the signal for a general feast at those places where
they were taken. An influential man ascended a tree
and prayed to the spirit of the sky for good crops, fair
winds, and so on. Thereupon a tremendous clatter,
with drumming and shouting, was raised by all the
people in their houses for about half an hour. This
was followed by a dead quiet for four days, during
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
which the people feasted on the sea-slug. All this
time no work of any kind might be done, not even a
leaf plucked nor the offal removed from the houses. If
a noise was made in any house, as by a child crying, a
forfeit was at once exacted by the chief. At daylight
on the expiry of the fourth night the whole town
was in an uproar; men and boys scampered about,
knocking with clubs and sticks at the doors of the
houses and crying <q>Sinariba.</q> This concluded the
ceremony.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>U.S. Exploring Expedition, Ethnography
and Philology</hi>, by H. Hale, p.
67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
U.S. Exploring Expedition</hi>, iii. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
According to the latter, the sea-slug
was eaten by the men alone, who lived
during the four days in the temple,
while the women and boys remained
shut up in their houses.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the night before spring begins the Japanese
throw roasted beans against the walls and floors of
their houses, crying thrice loudly, <q>Away from here,
wicked spirit!</q> but adding softly, <q>Enter, O god of
riches!</q><note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, v. 367.</note> Amongst some of the Hindus of the Punjaub
on the morning after Diwali or the festival of
lamps (at which the souls of ancestors are believed to
visit the house) the oldest woman of the family takes
all the sweepings and rubbish of the family and throws
them out, with the words, <q>Let all dirt and wretchedness
depart from here, and all good fortune come in.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. No.
792; D. C. J. Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines of
Panjab Ethnography</hi>, p. 119.</note>
In Tonquin a <foreign rend='italic'>theckydaw</foreign> or general expulsion of
malevolent spirits commonly took place once a year,
especially if there was a great mortality amongst men
or cattle, <q>the cause of which they attribute to the
malicious spirits of such men as have been put to death
for treason, rebellion, and conspiring the death of the
king, general, or princes, and in that revenge of the
punishment they have suffered, they are bent to destroy
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
everything and commit horrible violence. To prevent
which their superstition has suggested to them the
institution of this theckydaw as a proper means to drive
the devil away, and purge the country of evil spirits.</q>
The day appointed for the ceremony was generally the
25th of February, one month after the commencement
of the new year, which began on the 25th of January.
The intermediate month was a season of feasting,
merry-making of all kinds, and general licence. During
the whole month the great seal was kept shut up in
a box, face downwards, and the law was, as it were,
laid asleep. All courts of justice were closed; debtors
could not be seized; small crimes, such as petty
larceny, fighting, and assault, escaped with impunity;
only treason and murder were taken account of and
the malefactors detained till the great seal should
come into operation again. At the close of the
saturnalia the wicked spirits were driven away. Great
masses of troops and artillery having been drawn up
with flying colours and all the pomp of war, <q>the
general beginneth then to offer meat offerings to the
criminal devils and malevolent spirits (for it is usual
and customary likewise amongst them to feast the
condemned before their execution), inviting them to
eat and drink, when presently he accuses them in a
strange language, by characters and figures, etc., of
many offences and crimes committed by them, as to
their having disquieted the land, killed his elephants
and horses, etc., for all which they justly deserved to
be chastised and banished the country. Whereupon
three great guns are fired as the last signal; upon
which all the artillery and musquets are discharged,
that, by their most terrible noise the devils may be
driven away; and they are so blind as to believe
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
for certain, that they really and effectually put them
to flight.</q><note place='foot'>Baron, <q>Description of the Kingdom
of Tonqueen,</q> Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi>, ix. 673, 695 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; cp.
Richard, <q>History of Tonquin,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p.
746. The account of the ceremony by
Tavernier (whom Baron criticises very
unfavourably) is somewhat different.
According to him the expulsion of
wicked souls at the New Year is combined
with sacrifice to the honoured dead.
See Harris, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, i. 823.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Cambodia the expulsion of evil spirits took place
in March. Bits of broken statues and stones, considered
as the abode of the demons, were collected and brought
to the capital. Here as many elephants were collected
as could be got together. On the evening of the full
moon volleys of musketry were fired and the elephants
charged furiously to put the devils to flight.<note place='foot'>Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notice sur le Cambodge</hi>,
p. 62.</note> In Siam
the banishment of demons is annually carried into
effect on the last day of the old year. A signal gun
is fired from the palace; it is answered from the
next station, and so on from station to station, till the
firing has reached the outer gate of the city. Thus
the demons are driven out step by step. As soon as
this is done a consecrated rope is fastened round the
circuit of the city walls to prevent the banished demons
from returning. The rope is made of tough couch-grass
and is painted in alternate stripes of red, yellow, and
blue.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. 237, 298, 314, 529 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Royaume Thai ou Siam</hi>, i.
252. Bastian (p. 314), with whom
Pallegoix seems to agree, distinctly
states that the expulsion takes place on
the last day of the year. Yet both
state that it occurs in the fourth month
of the year. According to Pallegoix
(i. 253) the Siamese year is composed
of twelve lunar months, and the first
month usually begins in December.
Hence the expulsion of devils would
commonly take place in March, as in
Cambodia.</note> The Shans of Southern China annually expel the
fire-spirit. The ceremony was witnessed by the English
Mission under Colonel Sladen on the 13th of August
1868. Bullocks and cows were slaughtered in the
market-place; the meat was all sold, part of it was
cooked and eaten, while the rest was fired out of guns
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
at sundown. The pieces of flesh which fell on the
land were supposed to become mosquitoes, those which
fell in the water were believed to turn into leeches.
In the evening the chief's retainers beat gongs and
blew trumpets; and when darkness had set in torches
were lit and a party, preceded by the musicians, searched
the central court for the fire-spirit, who is supposed to
lurk about at this season with evil intent. They then
searched all the rooms and the gardens, throwing the
light of the torches into every nook and corner where
the evil spirit might find a hiding-place.<note place='foot'>J. Anderson, <hi rend='italic'>Mandalay to Momien</hi>, p. 308.</note>
</p>

<p>
Annual expulsions of demons or of evil influences
are not unknown in Europe at the present
day. Amongst the heathen Wotyaks, a Finnish
people of Eastern Russia, all the young girls of the
village assemble on the last day of the year or on New
Year's Day armed with sticks, the ends of which are
split in nine places. With these they beat every
corner of the house and yard, saying, <q>We are driving
Satan out of the village.</q> Afterwards the sticks are
thrown into the river below the village, and as they
float down stream Satan goes with them to the next
village, from which he must be driven out in turn. In
some villages the expulsion is managed otherwise.
The unmarried men receive from every house in the
village groats, flesh, and brandy. These they take to
the field, light a fire under a fir-tree, boil the groats,
and eat of the food they have brought with them, after
pronouncing the words, <q>Go away into the wilderness,
come not into the house.</q> Then they return to the
village and enter every house where there are young
women. They take hold of the young women and
throw them into the snow, saying, <q>May the spirits of
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
disease leave you.</q> The remains of the groats and
the other food are then distributed among all the
houses in proportion to the amount that each contributed,
and each family consumes its share. According
to a Wotyak of the Malmyz district the young
men throw into the snow whomever they find in the
houses, and this is called <q>driving out Satan;</q> moreover
some of the boiled groats are thrown into the
fire with the words, <q>O god, afflict us not with sickness
and pestilence, give us not up as a prey to the
spirits of the wood.</q> But the most antique form of
the ceremony is that observed by the Wotyaks of the
Kasan Government. First of all a sacrifice is offered
to the Devil at noon. Then all the men assemble on
horseback in the centre of the village, and decide with
which house they shall begin. When this question,
which often gives rise to hot disputes, is settled, they
tether their horses to the paling, and arm themselves
with whips, clubs of lime-wood, and bundles of lighted
twigs. The lighted twigs are believed to have the
greatest terrors for Satan. Thus armed, they proceed
with frightful cries to beat every corner of the house
and yard, then shut the door, and spit at the ejected
fiend. So they go from house to house, till the Devil
has been driven from every one. Then they mount
their horses and ride out of the village, yelling wildly
and brandishing their clubs in every direction. Outside
of the village they fling away the clubs and spit
once more at the Devil.<note place='foot'>Max Buch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wotjäken</hi>, p. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Cheremiss, another
Finnish people of Eastern Russia, chase Satan from
their dwellings by beating the walls with cudgels of
lime-wood. When he has fled to the wood, they pelt
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
the trees with some of the cheese-cakes and eggs which
furnished the feast.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der Geschichte</hi>,
ii. 94.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Albania on Easter Eve the young people light
torches of resinous wood and march in procession,
swinging them, through the village. At last they
throw the torches into the river, crying, <q>Ha, Kore!
we throw you into the river, like these torches, that
you may never return.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Albanesische
Studien</hi>, i. 160. Cp. above, vol. i. p.
276.</note> In some villages of Calabria
the month of March is inaugurated with the expulsion
of the witches. It takes place at night to the sound
of the church bells, the people running about the streets
and crying, <q>March is come.</q> They say that the
witches roam about in March, and the ceremony is
repeated every Friday evening during the month.<note place='foot'>Vincenzo Dorsa, <hi rend='italic'>La tradizione
greco-latina negli usi e nelle credenze
popolari della Calabria Citeriore</hi>, p. 42
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
the Tyrol the expulsion of witches takes place on the
first of May. On a Thursday at midnight bundles are
made up of resinous splinters, black and red spotted
hemlock, caper-spurge, rosemary, and twigs of the
sloe. These are kept and burned on May Day by
men who must first have received plenary absolution
from the church. On the last three days of April all
the houses are cleansed and fumigated with juniper
berries and rue. On May Day, when the evening bell
has rung and the twilight is falling, the ceremony of
<q>burning out the witches,</q> as it is called, begins.
Men and boys make a racket with whips, bells, pots,
and pans; the women carry censers; the dogs are
unchained and run barking and yelping about. As
soon as the church bells begin to ring, the bundles of
twigs, fastened on poles, are set on fire and the incense
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
is ignited. Then all the house-bells and dinner-bells
are rung, pots and pans are clashed, dogs bark, every
one must make a noise. And amid this hubbub all
scream at the pitch of their voices,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Witch flee, flee from here,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Or it will go ill with thee.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then they run seven times round the houses, the
yards, and the village. So the witches are smoked
out of their lurking-places and driven away.<note place='foot'>Von Alpenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen
Tirols</hi>, p. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A Westphalian
form of the expulsion of evil is the
driving out the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Süntevögel</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sunnenvögel</foreign>,
or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sommervögel</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the butterfly.
On St. Peter's Day, 22d February,
children go from house to house knocking
on them with hammers and singing
doggerel rhymes in which they bid the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sommervögel</foreign> to depart. Presents are
given to them at every house. Or the
people of the house themselves go
through all the rooms, knocking on
all the doors, to drive away the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sunnenvögel</foreign>.
If this ceremony is omitted,
it is thought that various misfortunes
will be the consequence. The house
will swarm with rats, mice, and other
vermin, the cattle will be sick, the
butterflies will multiply at the milk-bowls,
etc. Woeste, <hi rend='italic'>Volksüberlieferungen
in der Grafschaft Mark</hi>, p. 24;
J. W. Wolf, Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie, i. 87; A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Westfälische
Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen</hi>,
ii. §§ 366-374; Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die
deutschen Volksfeste, Volksbräuche</hi>, etc.,
p. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche
bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</hi>,
pp. 94-96.</note> At
Brunnen in Switzerland the boys go about in
procession on Twelfth Night, carrying torches and
lanterns, and making a great noise with horns, cow-bells,
whips, etc. This is said to frighten away the two
female spirits of the wood, Strudeli and Strätteli.<note place='foot'>Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N. F. xxx. 198.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='15. Scapegoats.'/>
<head>§ 15.&mdash;Scapegoats.</head>

<p>
Thus far the examples cited have belonged to the
class of direct or immediate expulsion of ills. It
remains to illustrate the second class of expulsions, in
which the evil influences are either embodied in a
visible form or are at least supposed to be loaded
upon a material medium, which acts as a vehicle to
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
draw them off from the people, village, or town. The
Pomos of California celebrate an expulsion of devils
every seven years, at which the devils are represented
by disguised men. <q>Twenty or thirty men array
themselves in harlequin rig and barbaric paint, and
put vessels of pitch on their heads; then they secretly
go out into the surrounding mountains. These are to
personify the devils. A herald goes up to the top of
the assembly-house, and makes a speech to the multitude.
At a signal agreed upon in the evening the
masqueraders come in from the mountains, with the
vessels of pitch flaming on their heads, and with all
the frightful accessories of noise, motion, and costume
which the savage mind can devise in representation of
demons. The terrified women and children flee for
life, the men huddle them inside a circle, and, on the
principle of fighting the devil with fire, they swing
blazing firebrands in the air, yell, whoop, and make
frantic dashes at the marauding and bloodthirsty devils,
so creating a terrific spectacle, and striking great fear
into the hearts of the assembled hundreds of women,
who are screaming and fainting and clinging to their
valorous protectors. Finally the devils succeed in
getting into the assembly-house, and the bravest of
the men enter and hold a parley with them. As a
conclusion of the whole farce, the men summon courage,
the devils are expelled from the assembly-house, and
with a prodigious row and racket of sham fighting are
chased away into the mountains.</q><note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>, p. 159.</note> In spring, as soon
as the willow leaves were full grown on the banks of
the river, the Mandan Indians celebrated their great
annual festival, one of the features of which was the
expulsion of the devil. A man, painted black to
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
represent the devil, entered the village from the
prairie, chased and frightened the women, and acted
the part of a buffalo bull in the buffalo dance, the
object of which was to ensure a plentiful supply of
buffaloes during the ensuing year. Finally he was
chased from the village, the women pursuing him with
hisses and gibes, beating him with sticks, and pelting
him with dirt.<note place='foot'>G. Catlin, <hi rend='italic'>North American Indians</hi>,
i. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>O-kee-pa, a Religious
Ceremony, and other Customs of the
Mandans</hi>.</note> On the last night of the year the
palace of the Kings of Cambodia is purged of devils.
Men painted as fiends are chased by elephants about
the palace courts. When they have been expelled, a
consecrated thread of cotton is stretched round the
palace to keep them out.<note place='foot'>Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>,
i. 172. Cp. above, p. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>.</note> The Kasyas, a hill tribe of
Assam, annually expel the demons. The ceremony
takes place on a fixed month in the year, and part of
it consists in a struggle between two bands of men
who stand on opposite sides of a stream, each side
tugging at the end of a rope which is stretched across
the water. In this contest, which resembles the game
of <q>French and English,</q> the men on one side probably
represent the demons.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandl. d. Berlin.
Gesellsch. f. Anthropol.</hi> 1881, p. 151;
cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</hi>,
p. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Amongst the Chukmas of
South-east India the body of a priest is
conveyed to the place of cremation on
a car; ropes are attached to the car,
the people divide themselves into two
equal bodies and pull at the ropes in
opposite directions. <q>One side represents
the good spirits; the other,
the powers of evil. The contest is so
arranged that the former are victorious.
Sometimes, however, the young men
representing the demons are inclined
to pull too vigorously, but a stick
generally quells this unseemly ardour
in the cause of evil.</q> Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild
Tribes of South-Eastern India</hi>, p. 185.
The contest is like that between the
angels and devils depicted in the frescoes
of the Campo Santo at Pisa. In
Burma a similar contest takes place at
the funeral of a holy man; but there
the original meaning of the ceremony
appears to be forgotten. See Sangermano,
<hi rend='italic'>Description of the Burmese Empire</hi>
(ed. 1885), p. 98; Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British
Burma</hi>, p. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Shway Yoe,
<hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, ii. 334 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 342. Sometimes
ceremonies of this sort are
instituted for a different purpose. In
some East Indian islands when the
people want a rainy wind from the
west, the population of the village,
men, women, and children, divide into
two parties and pull against each other
at the ends of a long bamboo. But the
party at the eastern end must pull the
harder, in order to draw the desired wind
out of the west. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 282. The Cingalese perform
a ceremony like <q>French and
English</q> in honour of the goddess
Patiné. Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>Eleven Years in
Ceylon</hi> (London, 1840), i. 358.</note> At Carmona in Andalusia,
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
on one day of the year, boys are stripped naked and
smeared with glue in which feathers are stuck. Thus
disguised, they run from house to house, the people
trying to avoid them and to bar their houses against
them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. 174.</note> The ceremony is probably a relic of an annual
expulsion of devils.
</p>

<p>
Oftener, however, the expelled demons are not
represented at all, but are understood to be present
invisibly in the material and visible vehicle which
conveys them away. Here, again, it will be convenient
to distinguish between occasional and periodical
expulsions. We begin with the former.
</p>

<p>
The vehicle which conveys away the demons may
be of various kinds. A common one is a little ship or
boat. Thus, in the southern district of the island of
Ceram, when a whole village suffers from sickness,
a small ship is made and filled with rice,
tobacco, eggs, etc., which have been contributed by
all the people. A little sail is hoisted on the ship.
When all is ready, a man calls out in a very loud
voice, <q>O all ye sicknesses, ye small-poxes, agues,
measles, etc., who have visited us so long and wasted
us so sorely, but who now cease to plague us, we have
made ready this ship for you, and we have furnished
you with provender sufficient for the voyage. Ye
shall have no lack of food nor of <foreign rend='italic'>siri</foreign> nor of <foreign rend='italic'>pinang</foreign>
nor of tobacco. Depart, and sail away from us
directly; never come near us again, but go to a land
which is far from here. Let all the tides and winds
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
waft you speedily thither, and so convey you thither
that for the time to come we may live sound and well,
and that we may never see the sun rise on you again.</q>
Then ten or twelve men carry the vessel to the shore,
and let it drift away with the land-breeze, feeling
convinced that they are free from sickness for ever,
or at least till the next time. If sickness attacks them
again, they are sure it is not the same sickness, but a
different one, which in due time they dismiss in the
same manner. When the demon-laden bark is lost
to sight, the bearers return to the village, whereupon
a man cries out, <q>The sicknesses are now gone,
vanished, expelled, and sailed away.</q> At this all
the people come running out of their houses, passing
the word from one to the other with great joy, beating
on gongs and on tinkling instruments.<note place='foot'>François Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud-en nieuw Ost-Indiën</hi>, iii. 14. Backer, <hi rend='italic'>L'Archipel
Indien</hi>, p. 377 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, copies from Valentyn.</note>
</p>

<p>
Similar ceremonies are commonly resorted to in other
East Indian islands. Thus in Timorlaut, to mislead the
demons who are causing sickness, a small prao, containing
the image of a man and provisioned for a long
voyage, is allowed to drift away with wind and tide. As
it is being launched, the people cry, <q>O sickness, go
from here; turn back; what do you here in this
poor land?</q> Three days after this ceremony a pig is
killed, and part of the flesh is offered to Dudilaa,
who lives in the sun. One of the oldest men says,
<q>Old sir, I beseech you, make well the grandchildren,
children, women, and men, that we may be able to
eat pork and rice and to drink palm-wine. I will
keep my promise. Eat your share, and make all
the people in the village well.</q> If the prao is
stranded at any inhabited spot, the sickness will break
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
out there. Hence a stranded prao excites much
alarm amongst the coast population, and they immediately
burn it, because demons fly from fire.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the
island of Buro the prao which carries away the
demons of disease is about twenty feet long, rigged
out with sails, oars, anchor, etc., and well stocked
with provisions. For a day and a night the people
beat gongs and drums, and rush about to frighten
the demons. Next morning ten stalwart young men
strike the people with branches, which have been
previously dipped in an earthen pot of water. As
soon as they have done so, they run down to the
beach, put the branches on board the prao, launch
another prao in great haste, and tow the disease-burdened
prao far out to sea. There they cast it
off, and one of them calls out, <q>Grandfather Small-pox,
go away&mdash;go willingly away&mdash;go visit another
land; we have made you food ready for the voyage,
we have now nothing more to give.</q> When they
have landed, all the people bathe together in the
sea.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this ceremony the reason for striking the
people with the branches is clearly to rid them of
the disease-demons, which are then supposed to be
transferred to the branches. Hence the haste with
which the branches are deposited in the prao and
towed away to sea. So in the inland districts of
Ceram, when small-pox or other sickness is raging,
the priest strikes all the houses with consecrated
branches, which are then thrown into the river, to
be carried down to the sea;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 141.</note> exactly as amongst
the Wotyaks of Russia the sticks which have been
used for expelling the devils from the village are
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
thrown into the river, that the current may sweep the
baleful burden away. In Amboina, for a similar
purpose, the whole body of the patient is rubbed with
a live white cock, which is then placed on a little
prao and committed to the waves;<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 78.</note> and in the Babar
archipelago the bark which is to carry away to sea
the sickness of a whole village contains a bowl of
ashes taken from every kitchen in the village, and
another bowl into which all the sick people have
spat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 357.</note> The plan of putting puppets in the boat to
represent sick persons, in order to lure the demons
after them, is not uncommon.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> pp. 266, 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 327, 357.
For other examples of sending away
disease-laden boats in these islands, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>
pp. 181, 210; Van Eck, <q>Schetsen
van het eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Nederlandsch Indië</hi>, N.S. viii. (1879)
p. 104; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>, i. 147;
Hupe, <q>Korte verhandeling over de
godsdienst, zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrland's Indië</hi>, 1846,
dl. iii. 150; Campen, <q>De godsdienstbegrippen
der Halmaherasche Alfoeren,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvii. (1882) p.
441; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 12, pp.
229-231; Van Hasselt, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving
van Midden-Sumatra</hi>, p. 98.</note>
</p>

<p>
The practice of sending away diseases in boats is
known outside the limits of the East Indian Archipelago.
Thus when the people of Tikopia, a small island
in the Pacific, to the north of the New Hebrides, were
attacked by an epidemic cough, they made a little
canoe and adorned it with flowers. Four sons of
the principal chiefs carried it on their shoulders all
round the island, accompanied by the whole population,
some of whom beat the bushes, while others
uttered loud cries. On returning to the spot from
which they had set out, they launched the canoe on the
sea.<note place='foot'>J. Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour
du monde et à la recherche de La
Pérouse, sur la corvette Astrolabe</hi>, v.
311.</note> In the Nicobar Islands, in the Bay of Bengal,
when there is much sickness in a village or no fish
are caught, the blame is laid upon the spirits. They
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
must be propitiated with offerings. All relations and
friends are invited, a huge pig is roasted, and the best
of it is eaten, but some parts are offered to the shades.
The heap of offerings remains in front of the house
till it is carried away by the rising tide. Then the
priests, their faces reddened with paint and swine's
blood, pretend to catch the demon of disease, and,
after a hand-to-hand struggle, force him into a
model boat, made of leaves and decked with garlands,
which is then towed so far to sea that neither wind
nor tide is likely to drive it back to the shore.<note place='foot'>Roepstorff, <q>Ein Geisterboot der
Nicobaresen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandl. der Berlin.
Gesellsch. f. Anthropologie</hi> (1881), p. 401.
For Siamese applications of the same
principle to the cure of individuals,
see Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 485 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Often the vehicle which carries away the collected
demons or ills of a whole community is an animal or
scapegoat. In the Central Provinces of India, when
cholera breaks out in a village, every one retires after
sunset to his house. The priests then parade the
streets, taking from the roof of each house a straw,
which is burnt with an offering of rice, <foreign rend='italic'>ghi</foreign>, and
turmeric, at some shrine to the east of the village.
Chickens daubed with vermilion are driven away in
the direction of the smoke, and are believed to carry
the disease with them. If they fail, goats are tried,
and last of all pigs.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. No.
418.</note> When cholera is very bad
among the Bhárs, Malláns, and Kurmís of India,
they take a goat or a buffalo&mdash;in either case the
animal must be a female, and as black as possible&mdash;then
they tie some grain, cloves, and red lead in a yellow
cloth on its back, and turn it out of the village. It
is conducted beyond the boundary, and is not allowed
to return.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> iii. No. 373.</note> The people of the city and cantonments of
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
Sagar being afflicted with a violent influenza, <q>I had
an application from the old Queen Dowager of Sagar
to allow of a noisy religious procession, for the purpose
of imploring deliverance from this great calamity.
Men, women, and children in this procession were
to do their utmost to add to the noise by 'raising
their voices in psalmody,' beating upon their brass
pots and pans with all their might, and discharging
firearms where they could get them. Before the
noisy crowd was to be driven a buffalo, which had
been purchased by general subscription, in order that
every family might participate in the merit. They
were to follow it out eight miles, where it was to be
turned loose for any man who would take it. If the
animal returned the disease must return with it, and
the ceremony be performed over again.... It was,
however, subsequently determined that the animal
should be a goat; and he was driven before the crowd
accordingly. I have on several occasions been requested
to allow of such noisy ceremonies in cases
of epidemics.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. No. 1127.</note> Once, when influenza was raging in
Pithuria, a man had a small carriage made, after a
plan of his own, for a pair of scapegoats, which were
harnessed to it and driven to a wood at some distance,
where they were let loose. From that hour the
disease entirely ceased in the town. The goats
never returned; had they done so, <q>the disease
must have come back with them.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> ii. No. 1123.</note> The idea of
the scapegoat is not uncommon in the hills of the
Eastern Ghats. In 1886, during a severe outbreak
of small-pox, the people of Jeypur made <q>puja</q> to
a goat, marched it to the Ghats, and let it loose on
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
the plains.<note place='foot'>F. Fawcett, <q>On the Saoras (or
Savaras),</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Soc.
Bombay</hi>, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> In Southern Konkan, on the appearance
of cholera, the villagers went in procession from the
temple to the extreme boundaries of the village,
carrying a basket of cooked rice covered with red
powder, a wooden doll representing the pestilence,
and a cock. The head of the cock was cut off at
the village boundary, and the body was thrown away.
When cholera was thus transferred from one village
to another, the second village observed the same
ceremony and passed on the scourge to its neighbours,
and so on through a number of villages.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Soc. Bombay</hi>, i.
37.</note> When the
Aymara Indians were suffering from a plague, they
loaded a llama with the clothes of the plague-stricken
people, and drove the animal into the mountains,
hoping that it would take the plague away with it.<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Parallelen
und Vergleiche</hi> (first series), p. 30.</note>
Sometimes the scapegoat is a man. Some of the
aboriginal tribes of China, as a protection against
pestilence, select a man of great muscular strength to
act the part of scapegoat. Having besmeared his face
with paint, he performs many antics with the view of
enticing all pestilential and noxious influences to attach
themselves to him only. He is assisted by a priest.
Finally the scapegoat, hotly pursued by men and
women beating gongs and tom-toms, is driven with
great haste out of the town or village.<note place='foot'>J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi>, ii. 306.</note> A Hindu
cure for the murrain is to hire a man of the Chamár
caste, turn his face away from the village, brand him
with a red-hot sickle, and let him go out into the
jungle, taking the murrain with him. He must not
look back.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i.
598.</note>
</p>

<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>

<p>
The mediate expulsion of evils by means of a
scapegoat or other material vehicle, like the immediate
expulsion of them in invisible form, tends to become
periodic, and for a like reason. Thus every year,
generally in March, the people of Leti, Moa, and
Lakor send away all their diseases to sea. They
make a prao about six feet long, rig it with sails,
oars, rudder, etc., and every family deposits in it
some rice, fruit, a fowl, two eggs, insects that ravage
the fields, etc. Then they let it drift away to sea,
saying, <q>Take away from here all kinds of sickness,
take them to other islands, to other lands, distribute
them in places that lie eastward, where the sun
rises.</q><note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
393.</note> The Biajas of Borneo annually send to sea a
little bark laden with the sins and misfortunes of the
people. The crew of any ship that falls in with
the ill-omened bark at sea will suffer all the sorrows
with which it is laden.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der
Geschichte</hi>, ii. 93.</note> At the beginning of the
dry season, every year, the Nicobar islanders carry
the model of a ship through their villages. The
devils are chased out of the huts, and driven on board
the little ship, which is then launched and suffered to
sail away with the wind.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> ii. 91.</note> At Sucla-Tirtha, in India,
an earthen pot containing the accumulated sins of the
people is (annually?) set adrift on the river. Legend
says that the custom originated with a wicked priest
who, after atoning for his guilt by a course of austerities
and expiatory ceremonies, was directed to sail
upon the river in a boat with white sails. If the white
sails turned black, it would be a sign that his sins were
forgiven him. They did so, and he joyfully allowed
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
the boat to drift with his sins to sea.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Asiatic Researches</hi>, ix. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst many
of the aboriginal tribes of China, a great festival is
celebrated in the third month of every year. It is held
by way of a general rejoicing over what the people
believe to be a total annihilation of the ills of the past
twelve months. This annihilation is supposed to be
effected in the following way. A large earthenware
jar filled with gunpowder, stones, and bits of iron is
buried in the earth. A train of gunpowder, communicating
with the jar, is then laid; and a match being
applied, the jar and its contents are blown up. The
stones and bits of iron represent the ills and disasters
of the past year, and the dispersion of them by the
explosion is believed to remove the ills and disasters
themselves. The festival is attended with much revelling
and drunkenness.<note place='foot'>J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi>, ii. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Old Calabar, in Guinea,
the devils are expelled once every two years. A
number of figures called <foreign rend='italic'>nabikems</foreign> are made of sticks
and bamboos, and fixed indiscriminately about the
town. Some of them represent human beings, others
birds, crocodiles, and so on. After three or four
weeks the devils are expected to take up their abode
in these figures. When the night comes for their
general expulsion, the people feast and sally out in
parties, beating at empty corners, and shouting with
all their might. Shots are fired, the <foreign rend='italic'>nabikems</foreign> are torn
up with violence, set in flames, and flung into the river.
The orgies last till daybreak, and the town is considered
to be rid of evil influences for two years to come.<note place='foot'>T. J. Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>Impressions of
Western Africa</hi>, p. 162.</note>
Mr. George Bogle, the English envoy sent to Tibet
by Warren Hastings, witnessed the celebration of the
Tibetan New Year's Day at Teshu Lumbo the capital
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
of the Teshu Lama. <q>The figure of a man, chalked
upon paper, was laid upon the ground. Many strange
ceremonies, which to me who did not understand them
appeared whimsical, were performed about it; and a
great fire being kindled in a corner of the court, it was
at length held over it, and being formed of combustibles,
vanished with much smoke and explosion. I was told
it was a figure of the devil.</q><note place='foot'>Bogle and Manning, <hi rend='italic'>Tibet</hi>, edited
by C. R. Markham, p. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
On one day of the year some of the people of the
Western Himalayas take a dog, intoxicate him with
spirits and bhang or hemp, and having fed him with
sweetmeats, lead him round the village and let him
loose. They then chase and kill him with sticks and
stones, and believe that, when they have done so, no
disease or misfortune will visit the village during the
year.<note place='foot'>E. T. Atkinson, <q>Notes on the
History of Religion in the Himalaya of
the North-West Provinces,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, liii. pt. i.
(1884), p. 62.</note> In some parts of Breadalbane it was formerly
the custom on New Year's Day to take a dog to the
door, give him a bit of bread, and drive him out, saying,
<q>Get away you dog! Whatever death of men,
or loss of cattle would happen in this house to the end
of the present year, may it all light on your head!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth
Century</hi>, from the MSS. of John
Ramsay of Ochtertyre, edited by Alex.
Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888), ii. 439.</note>
It appears that the white dogs annually sacrificed by
the Iroquois at their New Year Festival are, or have
been, regarded as scapegoats. According to Mr. J.
V. H. Clark, who witnessed the ceremony in January
1841, on the first day of the festival all the fires in the
village were extinguished, the ashes scattered to the
winds, and a new fire was kindled with flint and steel.
On a subsequent day, men dressed in fantastic costumes
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
went round the village, gathering the sins of the people.
On the morning of the last day of the festival, two
white dogs, decorated with red paint, wampum, feathers,
and ribbons were led out. They were soon strangled,
and hung on a ladder. Firing and yelling succeeded,
and half an hour later the dogs were taken into a
house, <q>where the peoples' sins were transferred to
them.</q> The dogs were afterwards burnt on a pyre of
wood.<note place='foot'>W. M. Beauchamp, <q>The Iroquois
White Dog Feast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American Antiquarian</hi>,
vii. 237.</note> According to the Rev. Mr. Kirkland, who
wrote last century, the ashes of the pyre upon which
one of the white dogs was burned were carried through
the village and sprinkled at the door of every house.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 236; T. Dwight, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in New England and New York</hi>, iv.
202.</note>
Formerly, however, as we have seen, the Iroquois
expulsion of evils was immediate and not by scapegoat.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Jews annually laid all the sins of the
people upon the head of a goat and sent it away into
the wilderness.<note place='foot'>Leviticus xvi. Modern Jews
sacrifice a white cock on the eve of the
Festival of Expiation, nine days after
the beginning of their New Year. The
father of the family knocks the cock
thrice against his own head, saying,
<q>Let this cock be a substitute for me,
let it take my place, let death be laid
upon this cock, but a happy life bestowed
on me and on all Israel.</q>
Then he cuts its throat and dashes the
bird violently on the ground. The
intestines are thrown on the roof of the
house. The flesh of the cock was
formerly given to the poor. Buxtorf,
<hi rend='italic'>Synagoga Judaica</hi>, c. xxv.</note>
</p>

<p>
The scapegoat upon whom the sins of the people
are periodically laid, may also be a human being. At
Onitsha, on the Quorra River, two human beings are
annually sacrificed to take away the sins of the land.
The victims are purchased by public subscription.
All persons who, during the past year, have fallen into
gross sins, such as incendiarism, theft, adultery, witchcraft,
etc. are expected to contribute 28 <foreign rend='italic'>ngugas</foreign>, or a little
over £2. The money thus collected is taken into the
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
interior of the country and expended in the purchase
of two sickly persons <q>to be offered as a sacrifice for
all these abominable crimes&mdash;one for the land and one
for the river.</q> A man from a neighbouring town is
hired to put them to death. The sacrifice of one of
these victims was witnessed by the Rev. J. C. Taylor
on 27th February 1858. The sufferer was a woman,
about nineteen or twenty years of age. She was
dragged alive along the ground, face downwards, from
the king's house to the river, a distance of two miles.
The crowds who accompanied her cried <q>Wickedness!
wickedness!</q> The intention was <q>to take away the
iniquities of the land. The body was dragged along
in a merciless manner, as if the weight of all their
wickedness was thus carried away.</q><note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>The
Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi>, pp. 343-345.
Cp. J. F. Schon and S. Crowther,
<hi rend='italic'>Journals</hi>, p. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The account of the
custom by J. Africanus B. Horton
(<hi rend='italic'>West African Countries and Peoples</hi>
p. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) is entirely from Taylor.</note> In Siam it was
formerly the custom on one day of the year to single
out a woman broken down by debauchery, and carry
her on a litter through all the streets to the music of
drums and hautboys. The mob insulted her and
pelted her with dirt; and after having carried her
through the whole city, they threw her on a dunghill
or a hedge of thorns outside the ramparts, forbidding
her ever to enter the walls again. They believed that
the woman thus drew upon herself all the malign
influences of the air and of evil spirits.<note place='foot'>Turpin, <q>History of Siam,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, ix.
579.</note> The people
of Nias offer either a red horse or a buffalo as a public
sacrifice to purify the land and obtain the favour of
the gods. Formerly, it is said, a man was bound to
the same stake as the buffalo, and when the animal
was killed, the man was driven away; no one might
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
receive him, converse with him, or give him food.<note place='foot'>Ködding, <q>Die Bataksche Götter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>, xii.
(1885) pp. 476, 478.</note>
Doubtless he was supposed to carry away the sins and
misfortunes of the people.
</p>

<p>
In Tibet the ceremony of the scapegoat is marked
by some peculiar features. The Tibetan New Year
begins with the new moon, which appears about
15th February. For twenty-three days afterwards
the government of Lhásá, the capital, is taken out
of the hands of the ordinary rulers and entrusted to
the monk of the Debang monastery who offers to
pay the highest sum for the privilege. The successful
bidder is called the Jalno, and he announces
the fact in person through the streets of Lhásá,
bearing a silver stick. Monks from all the neighbouring
monasteries and temples assemble to pay
him homage. The Jalno exercises his authority
in the most arbitrary manner for his own benefit, as
all the fines which he exacts are his by purchase.
The profit he makes is about ten times the amount
of the purchase money. His men go about the streets
in order to discover any conduct on the part of the
inhabitants that can be found fault with. Every
house in Lhásá is taxed at this time, and the slightest
fault is punished with unsparing rigour by fines. This
severity of the Jalno drives all working classes out
of the city till the twenty-three days are over.
Meantime, all the priests flock from the neighbourhood
to the Máchindránáth temple, where they perform
religious ceremonies. The temple is a very large one,
standing in the centre of the city, surrounded by
bazaars and shops. The idols in it are richly inlaid
with gold and precious stones. Twenty-four days
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
after the Jalno has ceased to have authority, he
assumes it again, and for ten days acts in the same
arbitrary manner as before. On the first of the ten
days the priests assemble as before at the Máchindránáth
temple, pray to the gods to prevent sickness
and other evils among the people, <q>and, as a peace-offering,
sacrifice one man. The man is not killed
purposely, but the ceremony he undergoes often
proves fatal.<note place='foot'>The ceremony referred to is probably
the one performed on the tenth
day, as described in the text.</note> Grain is thrown against his head, and
his face is painted half white, half black.</q> On the
tenth day, all the troops in Lhásá march to the temple
and form in line before it. The victim is brought
forth from the temple and receives small donations
from the assembled multitude. He then throws dice
with the Jalno. If the victim wins, much evil is
foreboded; but if the Jalno wins, there is great
rejoicing, for it is then believed that the victim has
been accepted by the gods to bear all the sins of
the people of Lhásá. Thereupon his face is painted
half white and half black, a leathern coat is put on him,
and he is marched to the walls of the city, followed
by the whole populace, hooting, shouting, and firing
volleys after him. When he is driven outside the city,
the people return, and the victim is carried to the
Sáme monastery. Should he die shortly afterwards,
the people say it is an auspicious sign; but if not,
he is kept a prisoner at the monastery for a whole
year, after which he is allowed to return to Lhásá.<note place='foot'><q>Report of a Route Survey by
Pundit&mdash;from Nepal to Lhasa,</q> etc.,
<hi rend='italic'>Journal Royal Geogr. Soc.</hi> xxxviii.
(1868) pp. 167, 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <q>Four Years'
Journeying through Great Tibet,
by one of the Trans-Himalayan Explorers,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceed. Royal Geogr. Soc.</hi>
N.S. vii. (1885) p. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Human scapegoats, as we shall see presently, were
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
well known in classical antiquity, and even in mediæval
Europe the custom seems not to have been wholly
extinct. In the town of Halberstadt in Thüringen
there was a church which was said to have been
founded by Charlemagne. In this church every year
a man was chosen, who was believed to be stained
with heinous sins. On the first day of Lent he was
brought to the church, dressed in mourning garb, with
his head muffled up. At the close of the service he
was turned out of the church. During the forty days
of Lent he perambulated the city barefoot, neither
entering the churches nor speaking to any one. The
canons took it in turn to feed him. After midnight he
was allowed to sleep on the streets. On the day
before Good Friday, after the consecration of the holy
oil, he was readmitted to the church and absolved
from his sins. The people gave him money. He
was called Adam, and was now believed to be in a
state of innocence.<note place='foot'>Aeneas Sylvius, <hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi> (Bâle, 1571),
p. 423 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Entlebuch in Switzerland,
down to the close of last century, the custom of
annually expelling a scapegoat was preserved in the
ceremony of driving <q>Posterli</q> from the village into
the lands of the neighbouring village. <q>Posterli</q>
was represented by a lad disguised as an old witch or
as a goat or an ass. Amid a deafening noise of horns,
clarionets, bells, whips, etc. he was driven out. Sometimes
<q>Posterli</q> was represented by a puppet, which
was drawn in a sledge and left in a corner of the
neighbouring village. The ceremony took place on
the Thursday evening of the last week but one before
Christmas.<note place='foot'>Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N.F. xxx. 198.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the scapegoat is a divine animal. The
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
people of Malabar share the Hindu reverence for the
cow, to kill and eat which <q>they esteem to be a crime
as heinous as homicide or wilful murder.</q> Nevertheless
<q>the Bramans transfer the sins of the people
into one or more Cows, which are then carry'd away,
both the Cows and the Sins wherewith these Beasts are
charged, to what place the Braman shall appoint.</q><note place='foot'>J. Thomas Phillips, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the
Religion, Manners, and Learning of the
People of Malabar</hi>, pp. 6, 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
When the ancient Egyptians sacrificed a bull, they
invoked upon its head all the evils that might otherwise
befall themselves and the land of Egypt, and
thereupon they either sold the bull's head to the
Greeks or cast it into the river.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 39.</note> Now, it cannot be
said that in the times known to us the Egyptians
worshipped bulls in general, for they seem to have
commonly killed and eaten them.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 38-41; Wilkinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi>, iii. 403 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (ed. 1878).</note> But a good many
circumstances point to the conclusion that originally
all cattle, bulls as well as cows, were held sacred by
the Egyptians. For not only were all cows esteemed
holy by them and never sacrificed, but even bulls might
not be sacrificed unless they had certain natural marks;
a priest examined every bull before it was sacrificed;
if it had the proper marks, he put his seal on the
animal in token that it might be sacrificed; and if
a man sacrificed a bull which had not been sealed, he
was put to death. Moreover, the worship of the
black bulls Apis and Mnevis, especially the former,
played an important part in Egyptian religion; all
bulls that died a natural death were carefully buried
in the suburbs of the cities, and their bones were afterwards
collected from all parts of Egypt and buried in a
single spot; and at the sacrifice of a bull in the great
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
rites of Isis all the worshippers beat their breasts and
mourned.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> On the whole, then, we are perhaps
entitled to infer that bulls were originally, as cows
were always, esteemed sacred by the Egyptians, and
that the slain bull upon whose head they laid the
misfortunes of the people was once a divine scapegoat.
It seems not improbable that the lamb annually slain
by the Madis of Central Africa is a divine scapegoat,
and the same supposition may partly explain the Zuni
sacrifice of the turtle.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Lastly, the scapegoat may be a divine man.
Thus, in November the Gonds of India worship
Ghansyam Deo, the protector of the crops, and at
the festival the god himself is said to descend on
the head of one of the worshippers, who is suddenly
seized with a kind of fit and, after staggering about,
rushes off into the jungle, where it is believed that,
if left to himself, he would die mad. As it is, he is
brought back, but does not recover his senses for
one or two days. <q>The idea is, that one man is thus
singled out as a scapegoat for the sins of the rest of the
village.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. No.
335.</note> In the temple of the Moon the Albanians
of the Eastern Caucasus kept a number of sacred
slaves, of whom many were inspired and prophesied.
When one of these men exhibited more than usual
symptoms of inspiration and wandered solitary up
and down the woods, like the Gond in the jungle, the
high priest had him bound with a sacred chain and
maintained him in luxury for a year. At the end of
the year he was anointed with unguents and led forth
to be sacrificed. A man whose business it was to
slay these human victims and to whom practice had
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
given dexterity, advanced from the crowd and thrust
a sacred spear into the victim's side, piercing his
heart. From the manner in which the slain man fell,
omens were drawn as to the welfare of the commonwealth.
Then the body was carried to a certain spot
where all the people stood upon it as a purificatory
ceremony.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xi. 4, 7. For the custom of standing upon a sacrificed victim,
cp. Demosthenes, p. 642; Pausanias, iii. 20, 9.</note> This last circumstance clearly indicates
that the sins of the people were transferred to the
victim, just as the Jewish priest transferred the sins of
the people to the scapegoat by laying his hand on the
animal's head; and since the man was believed to be
possessed by the divine spirit, we have here an
undoubted example of a man-god slain to take away
the sins and misfortunes of the people.
</p>

<p>
The foregoing survey of the custom of publicly
expelling the accumulated evils of a village or district
suggests a few general observations. In the first
place, it will not be disputed that what I have called
the immediate and the mediate expulsions of evil are
identical in intention; in other words, that whether
the evils are conceived of as invisible or as embodied
in a material form, is a circumstance entirely subordinate
to the main object of the ceremony, which is
simply to effect a total clearance of all the ills that
have been infesting a people. If any link were wanting
to connect the two kinds of expulsion, it would be
furnished by such a practice as that of sending the
evils away in a boat. For here, on the one hand, the
evils are invisible and intangible; and, on the other
hand, there is a visible and tangible vehicle to convey
them away. And a scapegoat is nothing more than
such a vehicle.
</p>

<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<p>
In the second place, when a general clearance of
evils is resorted to periodically, the interval between
the celebrations of the ceremony is commonly a year,
and the time of year when the ceremony takes place
usually coincides with some well-marked change of
season&mdash;such as the close of winter in the arctic and
temperate zones, and the beginning or end of the
rainy season in the tropics. The increased mortality
which such climatic changes are apt to produce,
especially amongst ill-fed, ill-clothed, and ill-housed
savages, is set down by primitive man to the agency
of demons, who must accordingly be expelled. Hence,
in New Britain and Peru, the devils are or were
driven out at the beginning of the rainy season.
When a tribe has taken to agriculture, the time for
the general expulsion of devils is naturally made to
agree with one of the great epochs of the agricultural
year, as sowing or harvest; but, as these epochs
themselves often coincide with changes of season, it
does not follow that the transition from the hunting or
pastoral to the agricultural life involves any alteration
in the time of celebrating this great annual rite.
Some of the agricultural communities of India and
the Hindoo Koosh, as we have seen, hold their
general clearance of demons at harvest, others at
sowing-time. But, at whatever season of the year it is
held, the general expulsion of devils commonly marks
the beginning of the new year. For, before entering
on a new year, people are anxious to rid themselves
of the troubles that have harassed them in the past;
hence the fact that amongst so many people&mdash;Iroquois,
Tonquinese, Siamese, Tibetans, etc.&mdash;the beginning of
the new year is inaugurated with a solemn and public
banishment of evil spirits.
</p>

<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>

<p>
In the third place, it is to be observed that this
public and periodic expulsion of devils is commonly
preceded or followed by a period of general licence,
during which the ordinary restraints of society are
thrown aside, and all offences, short of the gravest, are
allowed to pass unpunished. In Guinea and Tonquin
the period of licence precedes the public expulsion
of demons; and the suspension of the ordinary
government in Lhásá previous to the expulsion of
the scapegoat is perhaps a relic of a similar period
of universal licence. Amongst the Hos the period
of licence follows the expulsion of the devil. Amongst
the Iroquois it hardly appears whether it preceded or
followed the banishment of evils. In any case, the
extraordinary relaxation of all ordinary rules of conduct
on such occasions is doubtless to be explained
by the general clearance of evils which precedes or
follows it. On the one hand, when a general riddance
of evil and absolution from all sin is in immediate
prospect, men are encouraged to give the rein to
their passions, trusting that the coming ceremony
will wipe out the score which they are running up
so fast. On the other hand, when the ceremony
has just taken place, men's minds are freed from
the oppressive sense, under which they generally
labour, of an atmosphere surcharged with devils;
and in the first revulsion of joy they overleap the
limits commonly imposed by custom and morality.
When the ceremony takes place at harvest-time, the
elation of feeling which it excites is further stimulated
by the state of physical wellbeing produced by an
abundant supply of food.<note place='foot'>In the Dassera festival, as celebrated
in Nepaul, we seem to have
another instance of the annual expulsion
of demons preceded by a time of licence.
The festival occurs at the beginning of
October and lasts ten days. <q>During
its continuance there is a general holiday
among all classes of the people.
The city of Kathmandu at this time is
required to be purified, but the purification
is effected rather by prayer than
by water-cleansing. All the courts of
law are closed, and all prisoners in jail
are removed from the precincts of the
city.... The Kalendar is cleared,
or there is a jail-delivery always at the
Dassera of all prisoners.</q> This seems
a trace of a period of licence. At this
time <q>it is a general custom for masters
to make an annual present, either of
money, clothes, buffaloes, goats, etc.,
to such servants as have given satisfaction
during the past year. It is in this
respect, as well as in the feasting and
drinking which goes on, something like
our <q>boxing-time</q> at Christmas.</q> On
the seventh day at sunset there is a
parade of all the troops in the capital,
including the artillery. At a given
signal the regiments commence firing,
the artillery takes it up, and a general
firing goes on for about twenty minutes,
when it suddenly ceases. This probably
represents the expulsion of the
demons. <q>The grand cutting of the
rice-crops is always postponed till the
Dassera is over, and commences all
over the valley the very day afterwards.</q>
See the description of the festival in
Oldfield's <hi rend='italic'>Sketches from Nipal</hi>, ii. 342-351.
On the Dassera in India, see
Dubois, <hi rend='italic'>Moeurs, Institutions et Cérémonies
des Peuples de l'Inde</hi>, ii. 329
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Amongst the Wasuahili of East
Africa New Year's Day was formerly
a day of general licence, <q>every man
did as he pleased. Old quarrels were
settled, men were found dead on the
following day, and no inquiry was
instituted about the matter.</q> Ch. New,
<hi rend='italic'>Life, Wanderings, and Labours in
Eastern Africa</hi>, p. 65. In Ashantee
the annual festival of the new yams is
a time of general licence. See the Note
on <q>Offerings of first fruits</q> at the end
of the volume.</note>
</p>

<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>

<p>
Fourthly, the employment of a divine man or
animal as a scapegoat is especially to be noted;
indeed, we are here directly concerned with the
custom of banishing evils only in so far as these
evils are believed to be transferred to a god who is
afterwards slain. It may be suspected that the
custom of employing a divine man or animal as a
public scapegoat is much more widely diffused than
appears from the examples cited. For, as has
already been pointed out, the custom of killing a god
dates from so early a period of human history that
in later ages, even when the custom continues to
be practised, it is liable to be misinterpreted. The
divine character of the animal or man is forgotten, and
he comes to be regarded merely as an ordinary victim.
This is especially likely to be the case when it is a
divine man who is killed. For when a nation becomes
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
civilised, if it does not drop human sacrifices altogether,
it at least selects as victims only such criminals as
would be put to death at any rate. Thus, as in the
Sacaean festival at Babylon, the killing of a god may
come to be confounded with the execution of a
criminal.
</p>

<p>
If we ask why a dying god should be selected to
take upon himself and carry away the sins and sorrows
of the people, it may be suggested that in the practice
of using the divinity as a scapegoat we have a combination
of two customs which were at one time distinct
and independent. On the one hand we have seen
that it has been customary to kill the human or animal
god in order to save his divine life from being weakened
by the inroads of age. On the other hand we have
seen that it has been customary to have a general
expulsion of evils and sins once a year. Now, if it
occurred to people to combine these two customs, the
result would be the employment of the dying god as a
scapegoat. He was killed, not originally to take away
sin, but to save the divine life from the degeneracy of
old age; but, since he had to be killed at any rate,
people may have thought that they might as well
seize the opportunity to lay upon him the burden of
their sufferings and sins, in order that he might bear
it away with him to the unknown world beyond the
grave.
</p>

<p>
The use of the divinity as a scapegoat clears up
the ambiguity which, as we saw, appeared to hang
about the European folk-custom of <q>carrying out
Death.</q><note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Grounds have been shown for believing
that in this ceremony the so-called Death was
originally the spirit of vegetation, who was annually
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
slain in spring, in order that he might come to life
again with all the vigour of youth. But, as we saw,
there are certain features in the ceremony which are
not explicable on this hypothesis alone. Such are the
marks of joy with which the effigy of Death is
carried out to be buried or burnt, and the fear and
abhorrence of it manifested by the bearers. But these
features become at once intelligible if we suppose that
the Death was not merely the dying god of vegetation,
but also a public scapegoat, upon whom were laid
all the evils that had afflicted the people during the
past year. Joy on such an occasion is natural and
appropriate; and if the dying god appears to be the
object of that fear and abhorrence which are properly
due not to himself, but to the sins and misfortunes
with which he is laden, this arises merely from the
difficulty of distinguishing or at least of marking
the distinction between the bearer and the burden.
When the burden is of a baleful character, the bearer
of it will be feared and shunned just as much as if he
were himself instinct with those dangerous properties
of which, as it happens, he is only the vehicle.
Similarly we have seen that disease-laden and sin-laden
boats are dreaded and shunned by East Indian
peoples.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>.</note> Again, the view that in these popular
customs the Death is a scapegoat as well as a representative
of the divine spirit of vegetation derives some
support from the circumstance that its expulsion is
always celebrated in spring and chiefly by Slavonic
peoples. For the Slavonic year began in spring;<note place='foot'>H. Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N. F. (1875) xxx. 194.</note> and
thus, in one of its aspects, the ceremony of <q>carrying
out Death</q> would be an example of the widespread
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
custom of expelling the accumulated evils of the past
year before entering on a new one.
</p>

<p>
We are now prepared to notice the use of the scapegoat
in classical antiquity. Every year on the 14th
of March a man clad in skins was led in procession
through the streets of Rome, beaten with long white
rods, and driven out of the city. He was called Mamurius
Veturius,<note place='foot'>Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iii.
29, iv. 36. Lydus places the expulsion
on the Ides of March, that is 15th
March. But this seems to be a mistake.
See Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, xxx. 209 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Again, Lydus does not expressly say
that Mamurius Veturius was driven
out of the city, but he implies it
by mentioning the legend that his
mythical prototype was beaten with
rods and expelled the city. Lastly,
Lydus only mentions the name Mamurius.
But the full name Mamurius
Veturius is preserved by Varro, <hi rend='italic'>Ling.
Lat.</hi> vi. 45; Festus, ed. Muller, p.
131; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>, 13.</note> that is, <q>the old Mars,</q><note place='foot'>Usener, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Roscher,
<hi rend='italic'>Apollon und Mars</hi>, p. 27;
Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 360;
Vaniček, <hi rend='italic'>Griechisch-lateinisches etymologisches
Wörterbuch</hi>, p. 715. The
three latter scholars take Veturius
as = <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>annuus</foreign>, because <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vetus</foreign> is etymologically
equivalent to ἔτος. But, as
Usener argues, it seems quite unallowable
to take the Greek meaning of the
word instead of the Latin.</note> and as the ceremony
took place on the day preceding the first full moon of
the old Roman year (which began on 1st March), the
skin-clad man must have represented the Mars of the
past year, who was driven out at the beginning of a
new one. Now Mars was originally not a god of war
but of vegetation. For it was to Mars that the
Roman husbandman prayed for the prosperity of his
corn and his vines, his fruit-trees and his copses;<note place='foot'>Cato, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cult.</hi> 141.</note> it
was to Mars that the priestly college of the Arval
Brothers, whose business it was to sacrifice for the
growth of the crops,<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, v. 85.</note> addressed their petitions almost
exclusively;<note place='foot'>See the song of the Arval Brothers
in <hi rend='italic'>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</hi>, ed. Henzen,
p. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Wordsworth, <hi rend='italic'>Fragments
and Specimens of Early Latin</hi>, p. 158.</note> and it was to Mars, as we saw,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>.</note> that a
horse was sacrificed in October to secure an abundant
harvest. Moreover, it was to Mars, under his title of
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
<q>Mars of the woods</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mars Silvanus</foreign>) that farmers
offered sacrifice for the welfare of their cattle.<note place='foot'>Cato, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cult.</hi> 83.</note> We
have already seen that cattle are commonly supposed
to be under the special patronage of tree-gods.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> p. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Once
more, the fact that the vernal month of March was
dedicated to Mars seems to point him out as the deity
of the sprouting vegetation. Thus the Roman custom
of expelling the old Mars at the beginning of the
New Year in spring is identical with the Slavonic
custom of <q>carrying out Death,</q> if the view here
taken of the latter custom is correct. The similarity
of the Roman and Slavonic customs has been
already remarked by scholars, who appear, however, to
have taken Mamurius Veturius and the corresponding
figures in the Slavonic ceremonies to be representatives
of the old year rather than of the old god of vegetation.<note place='foot'>Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i.
360; Rosscher, <hi rend='italic'>Apollon und Mars</hi>, p.
49; Usener, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> The ceremony
also closely resembles the Highland
New Year ceremony described above,
p. 145 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
It is possible that ceremonies of this kind may
have come to be thus interpreted in later times even
by the people who practised them. But the personification
of a period of time is too abstract an idea to
be primitive. However, in the Roman, as in the
Slavonic, ceremony, the representative of the god
appears to have been treated not only as a deity of
vegetation but also as a scapegoat. His expulsion
implies this; for there is no reason why the god of vegetation,
as such, should be expelled the city. But it is
otherwise if he is also a scapegoat; it then becomes
necessary to drive him beyond the boundaries, that he
may carry his sorrowful burden away to other lands.
And, in fact, Mamurius Veturius appears to have been
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
driven away to the land of the Oscans, the enemies
of Rome.<note place='foot'>Propertius, v. 2, 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Usener,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 210. One of the functions
of the Salii or dancing priests, who
during March went up and down the
city dancing, singing, and clashing their
swords against their shields (Livy, i.
20; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>, 13; Dionysius
Halicarn. <hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> ii. 70) may have
been to rout out the evils or demons
from all parts of the city, as a preparation
for transferring them to the scapegoat
Mamurius Veturius. Similarly,
as we have seen (above, p. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>),
among the Iroquois, men in fantastic
costume went about collecting the sins
of the people as a preliminary to transferring
them to the scapegoat dogs.
We have had many examples of armed
men rushing about the streets and houses
to drive out demons and evils of all
kinds. The blows which were showered
on Mamurius Veturius seem to have
been administered by the Salii (Servius
on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vii. 188; Minucius
Felix, 24, 3; Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Röm. Myth.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
i. 360, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 1; Rosscher, <hi rend='italic'>Apollon und
Mars</hi>, p. 49). The reason for beating
the scapegoat will be explained presently.
As priests of Mars, the god of
agriculture, the Salii probably had also
certain agricultural functions. They
were named from the remarkable <emph>leaps</emph>
which they made. Now dancing and
leaping high are common sympathetic
charms to make the crops grow high.
See Peter, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Oesterreichisch
Schlesien</hi>, ii. 266; E. Meier,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 499, No. 333; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus
Böhmen</hi>, p. 49; O. Knoop, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen</hi>,
etc., <hi rend='italic'>aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern</hi>,
p. 176, No. 197; E. Sommer, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen,
Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen
und Thüringen</hi>, p. 148; Witzschel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>,
p. 190, No. 13; Woeste, <hi rend='italic'>Volksüberlieferungen
in der Grafschaft Mark</hi>,
p. 56; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria</hi>, ii. 298; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, iv. Abth.
ii. pp. 379, 382; Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische
Sitten u. Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi>, p. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Schulenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Wendische Volkssagen und Gebräuche</hi>,
p. 252; Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
§ 657; Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche
Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</hi>,
p. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; cp. Schott, <hi rend='italic'>Walachische
Mährchen</hi>, p. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Gerard,
<hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the Forest</hi>, i. 264;
Cieza de Leon, <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi> (Hakluyt Soc.
1864), p. 413. Was it one of the
functions of the Salii to dance and leap
on the fields at the spring or autumn
sowing, or at both? The dancing processions
of the Salii took place in
October as well as in March (Marquardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Sacralwesen</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 436 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), and
the Romans sowed both in spring and
autumn (Columella, ii. 9, 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) In
their song the Salii mentioned Saturnus
or Saeturnus the god of sowing (Festus,
p. 325, ed. Müller. <hi rend='italic'>Saeturnus</hi> is an
emendation of Ritschl's. See Wordsworth,
<hi rend='italic'>Fragments and Specimens of
Early Latin</hi>, p. 405). The weapons
borne by the Salii, while effective
against demons in general, may have
been especially directed against the
demons who steal the seed corn or the
ripe grain. Compare the Khond and
Hindoo Koosh customs described
above, p. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>. In Western Africa the
field labours of tilling and sowing are
sometimes accompanied by dances of
armed men on the field. See Labat,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage du Chevalier des Marchais en
Guinée, Isles voisines, et à Cayenne</hi>, ii.
p. 99 of the Paris ed., p. 80 of the
Amsterdam ed.; Olivier de Sanderval,
<hi rend='italic'>De l'Atlantique au Niger par le Foulah-Djallon</hi>
(Paris, 1883), p. 230. In
Calicut (Southern India) <q>they plough
the land with oxen as we do, and when
they sow the rice in the field they have
all the instruments of the city continually
sounding and making merry. They
also have ten or twelve men clothed
like devils, and these unite in making
great rejoicing with the players on the
instruments, in order that the devil
may make that rice very productive.</q>
Varthema, <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi> (Hakluyt Soc.
1863), p. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The resemblance
of the Salii to the sword-dancers of
northern Europe has been pointed out
by K. Müllenhoff, <q>Ueber den Schwerttanz,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Festgaben für Gustav Homeyer</hi>
(Berlin, 1871). In England the Morris
Dancers who accompanied the procession
of the plough through the streets
on Plough Monday (the first Monday
after Twelfth Day) sometimes wore
swords (Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
i. 505, Bohn's ed.), and sometimes
they <q>wore small bunches of corn in
their hats, from which the wheat was
soon shaken out by the ungainly jumping
which they called dancing....
Bessy rattled his box and danced so
high that he showed his worsted stockings
and corduroy breeches.</q> Chambers,
<hi rend='italic'>Book of Days</hi>, i. 94. It is to be observed
that in the <q>Lord of Misrule,</q> who
reigned from Christmas till Twelfth
Night (see Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
i. 497 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), we have a clear trace of
one of those periods of general licence
and suspension of ordinary government
which so commonly occur at the end
of the old year or beginning of the
new one in connection with a general
expulsion of evils. The fact that this
period of licence immediately preceded
the procession of the Morris Dancers
on Plough Monday seems to indicate
that the functions of these dancers
were like those which I have attributed
to the Salii. But the parallel cannot
be drawn out here. Cp. meantime
Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi>, pp.
31, 39. The Salii were said to have
been founded by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Morrius</foreign>, King of
Veii (Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> viii. 285).
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Morrius</foreign> seems to be etymologically the
same with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mamurius</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mars</foreign> (Usener,
<hi rend='italic'>Italische Mythen</hi>, p. 213). Can the
English <emph>Morris</emph> (in <emph>Morris</emph> dancers) be
the same? Analogy suggests that at
Rome the Saturnalia, which fell in
December when the Roman year began
in January, may have been celebrated
in February when the Roman
year began in March. Thus at Rome,
as in so many places, the public expulsion
of evils at the New Year would
be preceded by a period of general
licence, such as the Saturnalia was. A
trace of the former celebration of the
Saturnalia in February or the beginning
of March may perhaps be seen in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Matronalia</foreign>, celebrated on 1st March,
at which mistresses feasted their slaves,
just as masters feasted theirs at the Saturnalia.
Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12, 7;
Solinus, i. 35, p. 13, ed. Mommsen;
Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iii. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ancient Greeks were also familiar with the use
of a human scapegoat. At Plutarch's native town of
Chaeronea in Boeotia, there was a ceremony of this kind
performed by the chief magistrate at the Town Hall, and
by each householder at his own home. It was called
the <q>expulsion of hunger.</q> A slave was beaten with
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
rods of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agnus castus</foreign>, and turned out of doors with
the words, <q>Out with hunger, and in with wealth and
health.</q> When Plutarch held the office of chief magistrate
of his native town he performed this ceremony at
the Town Hall, and he has recorded the discussion to
which the custom afterwards gave rise.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> vi. 8.</note> The ceremony
closely resembles the Japanese, Hindoo, and Highland
customs already described.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<p>
But in civilised Greece the custom of the scapegoat
took darker forms than the innocent rite over which
the amiable and pious Plutarch presided. Whenever
Marseilles, one of the busiest and most brilliant of Greek
colonies, was ravaged by a plague, a man of the poorer
classes used to offer himself as a scapegoat. For a
whole year he was maintained at the public expense,
being fed on choice and pure food. At the expiry of
the year he was dressed in sacred garments, decked
with holy branches, and led through the whole city, while
prayers were uttered that all the evils of the people
might fall on his head. He was then cast out of the
city.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 57,
from Petronius.</note> The Athenians regularly maintained a number
of degraded and useless beings at the public expense;
and when any calamity, such as plague, drought, or
famine befell the city, they sacrificed two of these outcasts
as scapegoats. One of the victims was sacrificed
for the men and the other for the women. The former
wore round his neck a string of black, the latter a
string of white figs. Sometimes, it seems, the victim
slain on behalf of the women was a woman. They were
led about the city and then sacrificed, apparently by
being stoned to death outside the city.<note place='foot'>Helladius, in Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>,
p. 534 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, ed. Bekker; Schol. on Aristophanes,
<hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 734, and on <hi rend='italic'>Knights</hi>,
1136; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> φαρμακοί;
cp. Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> κάθαρμα, φαρμακοός,
and φαρμακούς; Lysias, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> vi. 53.
That they were stoned is an inference
from Harpocration. See next note.</note> But such
sacrifices were not confined to extraordinary occasions
of public calamity; it appears that every year, at the
festival of the Thargelia in May, two victims, one for
the men and one for the women, were led out of Athens
and stoned to death.<note place='foot'>Harpocration, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> φαρμακός, who
says δύο ἄνδρας Ἀθήνησιν ἑξῆγον
καθάρσια ἐσομένους τῆς πόλεως ἐν τοῖς
Θαργηλίοις, ἕνα μὲν ὑπερ τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ἕνα
δὲ ὑπερ τῶν γυναικῶν. He does not
expressly state that they were put to
death; but as he says that the ceremony
was an imitation of the execution
of a mythical Pharmacus who was stoned
to death, we may infer that the victims
were killed by being stoned. Suidas
(<hi rend='italic'>sv.</hi> φάρμακος) copies Harpocration.</note>
</p>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<p>
From the Lover's Leap, a white bluff at the
southern end of their island, the Leucadians used
annually to hurl a criminal into the sea as a scapegoat.
But to lighten his fall they fastened live birds
and feathers to him, and a flotilla of small boats waited
below to catch him and convey him beyond the boundary.<note place='foot'>Strabo, x. 2, 9. I do not know
what authority Wordsworth (<hi rend='italic'>Greece,
Pictorial, Historical, and Descriptive</hi>,
p. 354) has for saying that the priests
of Apollo, whose temple stood near
the edge of the cliff, sometimes flung
themselves down in this way.</note>
Doubtless these humane precautions were a
mitigation of an earlier custom of flinging the scapegoat
into the sea to drown. The custom of the scapegoat
as practised by the Greeks of Asia Minor in the sixth
century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> was as follows. When a city suffered
from plague, famine, or other public calamity, an ugly
or deformed person was chosen to take upon himself
all the evils by which the city was afflicted. He
was brought to a suitable place where dried figs, a
barley loaf, and cheese were put into his hand. These
he ate. Then he was beaten seven times upon his
genital organs with squills and branches of the wild
fig and other wild trees. Afterwards he was burned
on a pyre constructed of the wood of forest trees; and
his ashes were cast into the sea.<note place='foot'>Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Chiliades</hi>, v. 726-761.
Tzetzes's authority is the satyrical poet
Hipponax.</note> A similar custom
appears to have been annually celebrated by the Asiatic
Greeks at the harvest festival of the Thargelia.<note place='foot'>This may be inferred from the verse
of Hipponax, quoted by Athenaeus,
370 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, where for φαρμάκου we should
perhaps read φαρμακοῦ with Schneidewin
(<hi rend='italic'>Poetae lyr. Gr.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> ed. Bergk, ii.
763).</note>
</p>

<p>
In the ritual just described the beating of the
victim with squills, branches of the wild fig, etc.,
cannot have been intended to aggravate his sufferings,
otherwise any stick would have been good enough to
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
beat him with. The true meaning of this part of the
ceremony has been explained by W. Mannhardt.<note place='foot'>See his <hi rend='italic'>Mytholog. Forschungen</hi>, p.
113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, especially 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> 133.</note> He
points out that the ancients attributed to squills a
magical power of averting evil influences, and accordingly
hung them up at the doors of their houses and
made use of them in purificatory rites.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xx. 101;
Dioscorides, <hi rend='italic'>De mat. med.</hi> ii. 202;
Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Necyom.</hi> 7; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi>,
47; Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitious Man</hi>.</note> Hence the
Arcadian custom of beating the image of Pan with
squills at a festival or whenever the hunters returned
empty-handed,<note place='foot'>Theocritus, vii. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> with the
scholiast.</note> must have been meant, not to punish
the god, but to purify him from the harmful influences
which were impeding him in the exercise of his divine
functions as a god who should supply the hunter with
game. Similarly the object of beating the human
scapegoat on the genital organs with squills, etc., must
have been to release his reproductive energies from
any restraint or spell under which they might be laid
by demoniacal or other malignant agency; and as the
Thargelia at which he was annually sacrificed was an
early harvest festival,<note place='foot'>Cp. Aug. Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi>,
414 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p.
215.</note> we must recognise in him a
representative of the creative and fertilising god of
vegetation. The representative of the god was
annually slain for the purpose I have indicated, that
of maintaining the divine life in perpetual vigour,
untainted by the weakness of age; and before he was
put to death it was not unnatural to stimulate his
reproductive powers in order that these might be
transmitted in full activity to his successor, the new
god or new embodiment of the old god, who was
doubtless supposed immediately to take the place of
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
the one slain.<note place='foot'>At certain sacrifices in Yucatan
blood was drawn from the genitals of a
human victim and smeared on the face
of the idol. De Landa, <hi rend='italic'>Relation des
choses de Yucatan</hi>, ed. Brasseur de
Bourbourg (Paris, 1864) p. 167. Was
the original intention of this rite to
transfuse into the god a fresh supply of
reproductive energy?</note> Similar reasoning would lead to a
similar treatment of the scapegoat on special occasions,
such as drought or famine. If the crops did not
answer to the expectation of the husbandman, this
would be attributed to some failure in the generative
powers of the god whose function it was to produce
the fruits of the earth. It might be thought he was
under a spell or was growing old and feeble. Accordingly
he was slain in the person of his representative,
with all the ceremonies already described, in order
that, born young again, he might infuse his own
youthful vigour into the stagnant energies of nature.
On the same principle we can understand why
Mamurius Veturius was beaten with rods, why the
slave at the Chaeronean ceremony was beaten with
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agnus castus</foreign> (a tree to which magical properties
were ascribed),<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> ix. 26.</note> why the effigy of Death in north
Europe is assailed with sticks and stones, and why at
Babylon the criminal who played the god was scourged
before he was crucified. The purpose of the scourging
was not to intensify the agony of the divine
sufferer, but on the contrary to dispel any malignant
influences by which at the supreme moment he might
conceivably be beset.
</p>

<p>
The interpretation here given to the custom of
beating the human scapegoat with certain plants
is supported by many analogies. With the same
intention some of the Brazilian Indians beat themselves
on the genital organs with an aquatic plant,
the white <foreign rend='italic'>aninga</foreign>, three days before or after the new
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
moon.<note place='foot'>De Santa-Anna Nery, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
Brésilien</hi> (Paris, 1889) p. 253.</note> We have already had examples of the custom
of beating sick people with the leaves of certain plants
or with branches in order to rid them of the noxious
influences.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>. Compare
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Parallela</hi>, 35, where a woman
is represented as going from house to
house striking sick people with a hammer
and bidding them be whole.</note> At the autumn festival in Peru people
used to strike each other with torches saying, <q>Let all
harm go away.</q><note place='foot'>Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Indies</hi>, ii.
375 (Hakluyt Soc.) See above, p. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>.</note> Indians of the Quixos, in South
America, before they set out on a long hunting
expedition, cause their wives to whip them with
nettles, believing that this renders them fleeter and
helps them to overtake the peccaries. They resort to
the same proceeding as a cure for sickness.<note place='foot'>Osculati, <hi rend='italic'>Esplorazione delle regioni
equatoriali lungo il Napo ed il fiume
delle Amazzoni</hi> (Milan, 1854), p. 118.</note> At Mowat
in New Guinea small boys are beaten lightly with
sticks during December <q>to make them grow strong
and hardy.</q><note place='foot'>Ed. Beardmore, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropological
Notes collected at Mowat, Dandai, New
Guinea</hi> (1888) (in manuscript).</note> In Central Europe a similar custom is
very commonly observed in spring. On the 1st of
March the Albanians strike men and beasts with
cornel branches, believing that this is very good for
their health.<note place='foot'>Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Albanesische Studien</hi>, i.
155.</note> On Good Friday and the two previous
days people in Croatia and Slavonia take rods with
them to church, and when the service is over they beat
each other <q>fresh and healthy.</q><note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Kroatien und
Slavonien</hi> (Vienna, 1889), p. 108.</note> In some parts of
Russia people returning from the church on Palm
Sunday beat the children and servants who have stayed
at home with palm branches, saying, <q>Sickness into
the forest, health into the bones.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 257.</note> In Germany the
custom is widely known as <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Schmeckostern</foreign>, being
observed at Eastertide. People beat each other,
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
especially with fresh green twigs of the birch. The
beating is supposed to bring good luck; the person
beaten will, it is believed, be free of vermin during
the summer, or will have no pains in his back or his
legs for a year.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 258-263.
See his whole discussion of such customs,
pp. 251-303, and <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> pp.
113-153.</note>
</p>

<p>
If the view here taken of the Greek scapegoat is
correct, it obviates an objection which might otherwise
be brought against the main argument of this
chapter. To the theory that the priest of Nemi was
slain as a representative of the spirit of the grove, it
might have been objected that such a custom has no
analogy in classical antiquity. But reasons have
now been given for believing that the human being
periodically and occasionally slain by the Asiatic
Greeks was regularly treated as an embodiment of a
divinity. Probably the persons whom the Athenians
kept to be sacrificed were similarly treated as divine.
That they were social outcasts did not matter. On
the primitive view a man is not chosen to be the
mouth-piece or embodiment of a god on account of his
high moral qualities or social standing. The divine
afflatus descends equally on the good and the bad, the
lofty and the lowly. If then the civilised Greeks of
Asia and Athens habitually sacrificed men whom they
regarded as incarnate gods, there can be no inherent
improbability in the supposition that at the dawn of
history a similar custom was observed by the semi-barbarous
Latins in the Arician Grove.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='16. Killing the god in Mexico.'/>
<head>§ 16.&mdash;Killing the god in Mexico.</head>

<p>
But the religion of ancient Mexico, as it was found
and described by the Spanish conquerors in the sixteenth
century, offers perhaps the closest parallels to
the rule of the Arician priesthood, as I conceive that
rule to have been originally observed. Certainly
nowhere does the custom of killing the human representative
of a god appear to have been carried out
so systematically and on so extensive a scale as in
Mexico. <q>They tooke a captive,</q> says Acosta,
<q>such as they thought good; and afore they did
sacrifice him unto their idolls, they gave him the
name of the idoll, to whom hee should be sacrificed,
and apparelled him with the same ornaments like
their idoll, saying that he did represent the same idoll.
And during the time that this representation lasted,
which was for a yeere in some feasts, in others six
moneths, and in others lesse, they reverenced and
worshipped him in the same maner as the proper
idoll; and in the meane time he did eate, drincke, and
was merry. When hee went through the streetes the
people came forth to worship him, and every one
brought him an almes, with children and sicke folkes,
that he might cure them, and bless them, suffering him
to doe all things at his pleasure, onely hee was accompanied
with tenne or twelve men lest he should flie.
And he (to the end he might be reverenced as he
passed) sometimes sounded upon a small flute, that
the people might prepare to worship him. The feast
being come, and hee growne fatte, they killed him,
opened him, and eat him, making a solempne sacrifice
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
of him.</q><note place='foot'>Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Indies</hi>, ii. 323 (Hakluyt Soc. 1880).</note> For example, at the annual festival of the
great god Tezcatlipoca, which fell about Easter or a
few days later, a young man was chosen to be the
living image of Tezcatlipoca for a whole year. He
had to be of unblemished body, and he was carefully
trained to sustain his lofty role with becoming grace
and dignity. During the year he was lapped in luxury,
and the king himself took care that the future victim
was apparelled in gorgeous attire, <q>for already he
esteemed him as a god.</q> Attended by eight pages
clad in the royal livery, the young man roamed the
streets of the capital day and night at his pleasure,
carrying flowers and playing the flute. All who
saw him fell on their knees before him and adored
him, and he graciously acknowledged their homage.
Twenty days before the festival at which he was
to be sacrificed, four damsels, delicately nurtured,
and bearing the names of four goddesses, were given
him to be his brides. For five days before the
sacrifice divine honours were showered on him more
abundantly than ever. The king remained in his
palace, while the whole court went after the destined
victim. Everywhere there were solemn banquets
and balls. On the last day the young man, still
attended by his pages, was ferried across the lake in
a covered barge to a small and lonely temple, which,
like the Mexican temples in general, rose in the form
of a pyramid. As he ascended the stairs of the temple
he broke at every step one of the flutes on which he
had played in the days of his glory. On reaching
the summit he was seized and held down on a block of
stone, while a priest cut open his breast with a stone
knife, and plucking out his heart, offered it to the sun.
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
His head was hung among the skulls of previous
victims, and his legs and arms were cooked and prepared
for the table of the lords. His place was
immediately filled up by another young man, who for
a year was treated with the same profound respect,
and at the end of it shared the same fate.<note place='foot'>Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des choses de la
Nouvelle Espagne</hi> (Paris, 1880), pp.
61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 96-99, 103; Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>History
of the Indies</hi>, ii. 350 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Clavigero,
<hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, trans. by Cullen, i.
300; Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi>, ii. 319 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For other
Mexican instances of persons representing
deities and slain in that character,
see Sahagun, pp. 75, 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
123, 158 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 585 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 589;
Acosta, ii. 384 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Clavigero, i.
312; Bancroft, ii. 325 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The idea that the god thus slain in the person of
his representative comes to life again immediately, was
graphically represented in the Mexican ritual by
skinning the slain man-god and clothing in his skin a
living man, who thus became the new representative
of the godhead. Thus at an annual festival a woman
was sacrificed who represented Toci or the Mother
of the Gods. She was dressed with the ornaments,
and bore the name of the goddess, whose living
image she was believed to be. After being feasted
and diverted with sham fights for several days, she
was taken at midnight to the summit of a temple, and
beheaded on the shoulders of a man. The body was
immediately flayed, and one of the priests, clothing
himself in the skin, became the representative of the
goddess Toci. The skin of the woman's thigh was
removed separately, and a young man who represented
the god Cinteotl, the son of the goddess Toci, wrapt
it round his face like a mask. Various ceremonies
then followed, in which the two men, clad in the
woman's skin, played the parts respectively of the god
and goddess.<note place='foot'>Sahagun, pp. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 133-139;
Bancroft, iii. 353-359.</note> Again, at the annual festival of the
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
god Totec, a number of captives having been killed
and skinned, a priest clothed himself in one of their
skins, and thus became the image of the god Totec.
Then wearing the ornaments of the god&mdash;a crown of
feathers, golden necklaces and ear-rings, scarlet shoes,
etc.&mdash;he was enthroned, and received offerings of the
first fruits and first flowers of the season, together with
bunches of the maize which had been kept for seed.<note place='foot'>Sahagun, p. 584 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For this festival see also <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> 60,
87 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> 93; Clavigero, i. 297; Bancroft, ii. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Every fourth year the Quauhtitlans offered sacrifices
in honour of the god of fire. On the eve of the
festival they sacrificed two slaves, skinned them, and
took out their thigh bones. Next day two priests
clothed themselves in the skins, took the bones in
their hands, and with solemn steps and dismal howlings
descended the stairs of the temple. The people,
who were assembled in crowds below, called out,
<q>Behold, there come our gods.</q><note place='foot'>Clavigero, i. 283.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that human sacrifices of the sort I
suppose to have prevailed at Aricia were, as a matter
of fact, systematically offered on a large scale by a
people whose level of culture was probably not
inferior, if indeed it was not distinctly superior, to that
occupied by the Italian races at the early period to
which the origin of the Arician priesthood must be
referred. The positive and indubitable evidence of
the prevalence of such sacrifices in one part of the
world may reasonably be allowed to strengthen the
probability of their prevalence in places for which the
evidence is less full and trustworthy. Taken all
together, the evidence affords a fair presumption that
the custom of killing men whom their worshippers
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
regard as divine has prevailed in many parts of the
world. Whether the general explanation which I
have offered of that custom is adequate, and whether
the rule that the priest of Aricia had to die a violent
death is, as I have tried to show, a particular instance
of the general custom, are questions which I must now
leave to the judgment of the reader.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV&mdash;The Golden Bough.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Und grün des Lebens goldner Baum.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Faust</hi>.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Between heaven and earth.'/>
<head>§ 1.&mdash;Between heaven and earth.</head>

<p>
At the outset of this book two questions were proposed
for answer; Why had the priest of Nemi (Aricia) to
slay his predecessor? And why, before doing so,
had he to pluck the Golden Bough? Of these two
questions the first has now been answered. The
priest of Nemi, if I am right, embodied in himself
the spirit, primarily, of the woods and, secondarily, of
vegetable life in general. Hence, according as he
was well or ill, the woods, the flowers, and the fields
were believed to flourish or fade; and if he were to
die of sickness or old age, the plant world, it was
supposed, would simultaneously perish. Therefore
it was necessary that this priest of the woodlands, this
sylvan deity incarnate in a man, should be put to
death while he was still in the full bloom of his
divine manhood, in order that his sacred life, transmitted
in unabated force to his successor, might renew
its youth, and thus by successive transmissions through
a perpetual line of vigorous incarnations might remain
eternally fresh and young, a pledge and security that
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
the buds and blossoms of spring, the verdure of summer
woods, and the mellow glories of autumn would
never fail.
</p>

<p>
But we have still to ask, What was the Golden
Bough? and why had each candidate for the Arician
priesthood to pluck it before he could slay the priest?
These questions I will now try to answer.
</p>

<p>
It will be well to begin by noticing two of those
rules or taboos by which, as we have seen, the life of
divine kings or priests is regulated. The first of the
rules to which I desire to call the reader's attention is
that the divine personage may not touch the ground
with his foot. This rule was observed by the Mikado
of Japan and by the supreme pontiff of the Zapotecs
in Mexico. The latter <q>profaned his sanctity if he so
much as touched the ground with his foot.</q><note place='foot'>Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi>, ii. 142.</note> For the
Mikado to touch the ground with his foot was a
shameful degradation; indeed, in the sixteenth century,
it was enough to deprive him of his office. Outside
his palace he was carried on men's shoulders; within
it he walked on exquisitely wrought mats.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Memorials of Japan</hi> (Hakluyt
Society, 1850), pp. 14, 141; Varenius,
<hi rend='italic'>Descriptio regni Japoniae</hi>, p. 11; Caron,
<q>Account of Japan,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, vii. 613;
Kaempfer, <q>History of Japan,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
vii. 716.</note> The king
and queen of Tahiti might not touch the ground
anywhere but within their hereditary domains; for
the ground on which they trod became sacred. In
travelling from place to place they were carried on
the shoulders of sacred men. They were always
accompanied by several pairs of these sacred men; and
when it became necessary to change their bearers, the
king and queen vaulted on to the shoulders of their
new bearers without letting their feet touch the
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
ground.<note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, iii.
102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. 1836; James Wilson,
<hi rend='italic'>Missionary Voyage to the Southern
Pacific Ocean</hi>, p. 329.</note> It was an evil omen if the king of Dosuma
touched the ground, and he had to perform an
expiatory ceremony.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der
Geschichte</hi>, iii. 81.</note> The king of Persia was never
seen on foot outside his palace.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, 514 C.</note>
</p>

<p>
The second rule to be here noted is that the sun may
not shine upon the divine person. This rule was observed
both by the Mikado and by the pontiff of the
Zapotecs. The latter <q>was looked upon as a god whom
the earth was not worthy to hold, nor the sun to shine
upon.</q><note place='foot'>Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> The Japanese would not allow that the Mikado
<q>should expose his sacred person to the open air, and
the sun is not thought worthy to shine on his head.</q><note place='foot'>Kaempfer, <q>History of Japan,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, vii.
717; Caron, <q>Account of Japan,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> vii. 613; Varenius, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptio regni
Japoniae</hi>, p. 11, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Radiis solis caput
nunquam illustrabatur: in apertum
aërem non procedebat</foreign>.</q></note>
The heir to the throne of Bogota in Colombia, South
America, had to undergo a severe training from the
age of sixteen; he lived in complete retirement in a
temple, where he might not see the sun nor eat salt
nor converse with a woman.<note place='foot'>Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropologie der Naturvölker</hi>,
iv. 359.</note> The heir to the kingdom
of Sogamoso in Colombia, before succeeding to the
crown, had to fast for seven years in the temple, being
shut up in the dark and not allowed to see the sun or
light.<note place='foot'>Alonzo de Zurita, <q>Rapport sur
les differentes classes de chefs de la
Nouvelle-Espagne,</q> p. 30, in Ternaux-Compans's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages, Relations et
Mémoires originaux</hi> (Paris, 1840);
Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer
des alten Amerika</hi>, ii. 204.</note> The prince who was to become Inca of Peru
had to fast for a month without seeing light.<note place='foot'>Cieza de Leon, <hi rend='italic'>Second Part of the
Chronicle of Peru</hi> (Hakluyt Soc. 1883),
p. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now it is remarkable that these two rules&mdash;not to
touch the ground and not to see the sun&mdash;are observed
either separately or conjointly by girls at puberty in
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
many parts of the world. Thus amongst the negroes
of Loango girls at puberty are confined in separate
huts, and they may not touch the ground with any
part of their bare body.<note place='foot'>Pechuel-Loesche, <q>Indiscretes aus
Loango,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, x.
(1878) 23.</note> Amongst the Zulus and
kindred tribes of South Africa, when the first signs
of puberty show themselves <q>while a girl is walking,
gathering wood, or working in the field, she runs to
the river and hides herself among the reeds for the
day so as not to be seen by men. She covers her
head carefully with her blanket that the sun may not
shine on it and shrivel her up into a withered skeleton,
assured result from exposure to the sun's beams.
After dark she returns to her home and is secluded</q>
in a hut for some time.<note place='foot'>Rev. James Macdonald (Reay Free
Manse, Caithness), <hi rend='italic'>Manners, Customs,
Superstitions, and Religions of South
African Tribes</hi> (in manuscript).</note>
</p>

<p>
In New Ireland girls are confined for four or five
years in small cages, being kept in the dark and not
allowed to set foot on the ground. The custom has
been thus described by an eye-witness. <q>I heard
from a teacher about some strange custom connected
with some of the young girls here, so I asked the
chief to take me to the house where they were. The
house was about twenty-five feet in length, and stood
in a reed and bamboo enclosure, across the entrance
to which a bundle of dried grass was suspended
to show that it was strictly <q><foreign rend='italic'>tabu</foreign></q>. Inside the house
were three conical structures about seven or eight
feet in height, and about ten or twelve feet in circumference
at the bottom, and for about four feet
from the ground, at which point they tapered off to a
point at the top. These cages were made of the
broad leaves of the pandanus-tree, sewn quite close
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
together so that no light, and little or no air could
enter. On one side of each is an opening which is
closed by a double door of plaited cocoa-nut tree and
pandanus-tree leaves. About three feet from the
ground there is a stage of bamboos which forms the
floor. In each of these cages we were told there was
a young woman confined, each of whom had to
remain for at least four or five years, without ever
being allowed to go outside the house. I could
scarcely credit the story when I heard it; the whole
thing seemed too horrible to be true. I spoke to the
chief, and told him that I wished to see the inside of
the cages, and also to see the girls that I might make
them a present of a few beads. He told me that it was
<q><foreign rend='italic'>tabu</foreign>,</q> forbidden for any men but their own relations
to look at them; but I suppose the promised beads
acted as an inducement, and so he sent away for some
old lady who had charge, and who alone is allowed to
open the doors.... She had to undo the door when
the chief told her to do so, and then the girls peeped
out at us, and, when told to do so, they held out their
hands for the beads. I, however, purposely sat at some
distance away and merely held out the beads to them,
as I wished to draw them quite outside, that I might
inspect the inside of the cages. This desire of mine
gave rise to another difficulty, as these girls were not
allowed to put their feet to the ground all the time
they were confined in these places. However, they
wished to get the beads, and so the old lady had to go
outside and collect a lot of pieces of wood and bamboo,
which she placed on the ground, and then going to one
of the girls, she helped her down and held her hand as
she stepped from one piece of wood to another until
she came near enough to get the beads I held out to
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
her. I then went to inspect the inside of the cage out
of which she had come, but could scarcely put my head
inside of it, the atmosphere was so hot and stifling.
It was clean and contained nothing but a few short
lengths of bamboo for holding water. There was
only room for the girl to sit or lie down in a
crouched position on the bamboo platform, and when
the doors are shut it must be nearly or quite dark
inside. The girls are never allowed to come out except
once a day to bathe in a dish or wooden bowl placed
close to each cage. They say that they perspire
profusely. They are placed in these stifling cages
when quite young, and must remain there until they
are young women, when they are taken out and have
each a great marriage feast provided for them.</q><note place='foot'>The Rev. G. Brown, quoted by
the Rev. B. Danks, <q>Marriage Customs
of the New Britain Group,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Institute</hi>, xviii. 284 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; cp.
Rev. G. Brown, <q>Notes on the Duke
of York Group, New Britain, and New
Ireland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Royal Geogr. Soc.</hi>
xlvii. (1877) p. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Powell's
description of the New Ireland custom
is similar (<hi rend='italic'>Wanderings in a Wild
Country</hi>, p. 249). According to him
the girls wear wreaths of scented herbs
round the waist and neck; an old
woman or a little child occupies the
lower floor of the cage: and the confinement
lasts only a month. Probably
the long period mentioned by Mr.
Brown is that prescribed for chiefs'
daughters. Poor people could not
afford to keep their children so long
idle. This distinction is sometimes
expressly stated; for example, among
the Goajiras of Colombia rich people
keep their daughters shut up in
separate huts at puberty for periods
varying from one to four years, but
poor people cannot afford to do so for
more than a fortnight or a month.
F. A. Simons, <q>An exploration of the
Goajira Peninsula,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceed. Royal
Geogr. Soc.</hi> N.S. vii. (1885) p. 791.
In Fiji, brides who were being tattooed
were kept from the sun. Williams,
<hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>, i. 170. This
was perhaps a modification of the
Melanesian custom of secluding girls
at puberty. The reason mentioned
by Mr. Williams, <q>to improve her
complexion,</q> can hardly have been the
original one.</note>
</p>

<p>
In some parts of New Guinea <q>daughters of chiefs,
when they are about twelve or thirteen years of age,
are kept indoors for two or three years, never being
allowed, under any pretence, to descend from the
house, and the house is so shaded that the sun cannot
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
shine on them.</q><note place='foot'>Chalmers and Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Work and
Adventure in New Guinea</hi>, p. 159.</note> Among the Ot Danoms of Borneo
girls at the age of eight or ten years are shut up in a
little room or cell of the house and cut off from all
intercourse with the world for a long time. The cell,
like the rest of the house, is raised on piles above the
ground, and is lit by a single small window opening on
a lonely place, so that the girl is in almost total darkness.
She may not leave the room on any pretext
whatever, not even for the most necessary purposes.
None of her family may see her all the time she is shut
up, but a single slave woman is appointed to wait on
her. During her lonely confinement, which often lasts
seven years, the girl occupies herself in weaving mats
or with other handiwork. Her bodily growth is
stunted by the long want of exercise, and when, on
attaining womanhood, she is brought out, her complexion
is pale and wax-like. She is now shown the
sun, the earth, the water, the trees, and the flowers, as
if she were newly born. Then a great feast is made,
a slave is killed, and the girl is smeared with his
blood.<note place='foot'>Schwaner, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo, Beschrijving
van het stroomgebied van den Barito</hi>,
etc. ii. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Zimmerman, <hi rend='italic'>Die Inseln
des Indischen und Stillen Meeres</hi>, ii.
632 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Otto Finsch, <hi rend='italic'>Neu Guinea und
seine Bewohner</hi>, p. 116.</note> In Ceram girls at puberty were formerly shut
up by themselves in a hut which was kept dark.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
138.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst the Aht Indians of Vancouver Island,
when girls reach puberty they are placed in a sort
of gallery in the house <q>and are there surrounded
completely with mats, so that neither the sun nor any
fire can be seen. In this cage they remain for several
days. Water is given them, but no food. The
longer a girl remains in this retirement the greater
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
honour is it to the parents; but she is disgraced for
life if it is known that she has seen fire or the sun
during this initiatory ordeal.</q><note place='foot'>Sproat, <hi rend='italic'>Scenes and Studies of
Savage Life</hi>, p. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Thlinkeet
or Kolosh Indians of Alaska, when a girl shows
signs of womanhood she is shut up in a little hut
or cage, which is completely blocked up with the
exception of a small air-hole. In this dark and
filthy abode she had formerly to remain a year,
without fire, exercise, or associates. Her food was put
in at the small window; she had to drink out of the
wing-bone of a white-headed eagle. The time has
now been reduced, at least in some places, to six
months. The girl has to wear a sort of hat with
long flaps, that her gaze may not pollute the sky;
for she is thought unfit for the sun to shine upon.<note place='foot'>Erman, <q>Ethnographische Wahrnehmungen
u. Erfahrungen an den
Küsten des Berings-Meeres,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
f. Ethnologie</hi>, ii. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Langsdorff,
<hi rend='italic'>Reise um die Welt</hi>, ii. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Holmberg,
<q>Ethnogr. Skizzen über die
Völker d. russischen Amerika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Acta
Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae</hi>, iv.
(1856) p. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races
of the Pacific States</hi>, i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Krause,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Tlinkit-Indianer</hi>, p. 217 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Rev.
Sheldon Jackson, <q>Alaska and its
Inhabitants,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American Antiquarian</hi>,
ii. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. M. Grant, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of American Folk-lore</hi>, i. 169. For
caps, hoods, and veils worn by girls at
such seasons, compare G. H. Loskiel,
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Mission of the United
Brethren among the Indians</hi>, i. 56;
<hi rend='italic'>Journal Anthrop. Institute</hi>, vii. 206;
G. M. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Report of the Queen
Charlotte Islands</hi>, 1878 (Geological
Survey of Canada), p. 130 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B</hi>; Petitot,
<hi rend='italic'>Monographie des Dènè-Dindjié</hi>, pp.
72, 75; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions indiennes du
Canada Nord-Ouest</hi>, p. 258.</note>
Amongst the Koniags, an Esquimaux people of
Alaska, girls at puberty were placed in small huts
in which they had to remain on their hands and
knees for six months; then the hut was enlarged
enough to let them kneel upright, and they had
to remain in this posture for six months more.<note place='foot'>Holmberg, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 401; Bancroft,
i. 82; Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the
Population</hi>, etc. <hi rend='italic'>of Alaska</hi>, p. 143.</note>
</p>

<p>
When symptoms of puberty appeared on a girl for
the first time, the Indians of the Rio de la Plata
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
used to sew her up in her hammock as if she were
dead, leaving only a small hole for her mouth to allow
her to breathe. In this state she continued so long
as the symptoms lasted.<note place='foot'>Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Moeurs des Sauvages
amériquains</hi> i. 262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In similar circumstances
the Chiriguanos of Bolivia hoisted the girl in her
hammock to the roof, where she stayed for a month;
the second month the hammock was let half way down
from the roof; and in the third month old women,
armed with sticks, entered the hut and ran about
striking everything they met, saying they were
hunting the snake that had wounded the girl. This
they did till one of the women gave out that she
had killed the snake.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>, viii.
333. On the Chiriguanos see Von
Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Ethnographie Amerika's
zumal Brasiliens</hi>, p. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Amongst some of the Brazilian
Indians, when a girl attained to puberty, her hair was
burned or shaved off close to the head. Then she
was placed on a flat stone and cut with the tooth of
an animal from the shoulders all down the back, till
she ran with blood. Then the ashes of a wild gourd
were rubbed into the wounds; the girl was bound
hand and foot, and hung in a hammock, being
enveloped in it so closely that no one could see her.
Here she had to stay for three days without eating
or drinking. When the three days were over, she
stepped out of the hammock upon the flat stone, for
her feet might not touch the ground. If she had a
call of nature, a female relation took the girl on her
back and carried her out, taking with her a live coal
to prevent evil influences from entering the girl's body.
Being replaced in her hammock she was now allowed
to get some flour, boiled roots, and water, but might
not taste salt or flesh. Thus she continued to the end
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
of the first monthly period, at the expiry of which she
was gashed on the breast and belly as well as all down
the back. During the second month she still stayed
in her hammock, but her rule of abstinence was less
rigid, and she was allowed to spin. The third month
she was blackened with a certain pigment and began
to go about as usual.<note place='foot'>Thevet, <hi rend='italic'>Cosmographie Universelle</hi>
(Paris, 1575) ii. 946 B <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Lafitau,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i 290 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst the Macusis of British Guiana, when
a girl shows the first signs of puberty, she is hung
in a hammock at the highest point of the hut. For
the first few days she may not leave the hammock
by day, but at night she must come down, light a
fire, and spend the night beside it, else she would
break out in sores on her neck, throat, etc. So
long as the symptoms are at their height, she must
fast rigorously. When they have abated, she may
come down and take up her abode in a little compartment
that is made for her in the darkest corner
of the hut. In the morning she may cook her food,
but it must be at a separate fire and in a vessel of
her own. In about ten days the magician comes
and undoes the spell by muttering charms and breathing
on her and on the more valuable of the things with
which she has come in contact. The pots and drinking
vessels which she used are broken and the fragments
buried. After her first bath, the girl must submit to
be beaten by her mother with thin rods without
uttering a cry. At the end of the second period she
is again beaten, but not afterwards. She is now
<q>clean,</q> and can mix again with people.<note place='foot'>Schomburgk, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Britisch
Guiana</hi>, ii. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Zur
Ethnographie Amerika's</hi>, p. 644.</note> Other
Indians of Guiana, after keeping the girl in her
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
hammock at the top of the hut for a month, expose
her to certain large ants, whose bite is very painful.<note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage du Chevalier des
Marchais en Guinée, Isles voisines, et à
Cayenne</hi>, iv. p. 365 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Paris ed.), p. 17
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Amsterdam ed.)</note>
The custom of stinging the girl with ants or beating
her with rods is intended, we may be sure, not as a
punishment or a test of endurance, but as a purification,
the object being to drive away the malignant
influences with which a girl at such times is believed
to be beset and enveloped. Examples of purification,
both by beating and by stinging with ants, have
already come before us.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, vol. i. p. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Probably, beating or scourging
as a religious or ceremonial rite always originated
with a similar intention. It was meant to wipe off
and drive away a dangerous contagion (whether
personified as demoniacal or not) which was supposed
to be adhering physically, though invisibly,
to the body of the sufferer.<note place='foot'>This interpretation of the custom
is supported by the fact that beating
or scourging is inflicted on inanimate
objects expressly for the purpose indicated
in the text. Thus the Indians
of Costa Rica hold that there are two
kinds of ceremonial uncleanness, <foreign rend='italic'>nya</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign>. Anything that has been
connected with a death is <foreign rend='italic'>nya</foreign>. But
<foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign> is much more virulent. It
can not only make one sick but kill.
<q>The worst <foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign> of all is that of
a young woman in her first pregnancy.
She infects the whole neighbourhood.
Persons going from the house where
she lives carry the infection with them
to a distance, and all the deaths or
other serious misfortunes in the vicinity
are laid to her charge. In the old
times, when the savage laws and customs
were in full force, it was not an uncommon
thing for the husband of such
a woman to pay damages for casualties
thus caused by his unfortunate wife....
<foreign rend='italic'>Bu-ku-rú</foreign> emanates in a variety of
ways; arms, utensils, even houses
become affected by it after long disuse,
and before they can be used again
must be purified. In the case of
portable objects left undisturbed for a
long time, the custom is to beat them
with a stick before touching them. I
have seen a woman take a long walking
stick and beat a basket hanging from
the roof of a house by a cord. On
asking what that was for, I was told
that the basket contained her treasures,
that she would probably want to take
something out the next day, and that she
was driving off the <foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign>. A house
long unused must be swept, and then
the person who is purifying it must
take a stick and beat not only the
movable objects, but the beds, posts,
and in short every accessible part of
the interior. The next day it is fit for
occupation. A place not visited for a
long time or reached for the first time
is <foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign>. On our return from the
ascent of Pico Blanco, nearly all the
party suffered from little calenturas,
the result of extraordinary exposure to
wet and cold and want of food. The
Indians said that the peak was especially
<foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign>, since nobody had ever
been on it before.</q> One day Mr. Gabb
took down some dusty blow-guns amid
cries of <foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign> from the Indians.
Some weeks afterwards a boy died, and
the Indians firmly believed that the
<foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign> of the blow-guns had killed
him. <q>From all the foregoing, it
would seem that <foreign rend='italic'>bu-ku-rú</foreign> is a sort of
evil spirit that takes possession of the
object, and resents being disturbed;
but I have never been able to learn
from the Indians that they consider it
so. They seem to think of it as a
property the objects acquires.</q> W.
M. Gabb, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes and Languages
of Costa Rica</hi> (read before the
American Philosophical Society, 20th
August 1875), p. 504 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The pain inflicted on
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
the person beaten was no more the object of the
beating than it is of a surgical operation with us; it
was a necessary accident, that was all. In later times
such customs were interpreted otherwise, and the pain,
from being an accident, became the prime object of
the ceremony, which was now regarded either as a test
of endurance imposed upon persons at critical epochs
of life, or as a mortification of the flesh well pleasing
to the god. But asceticism, under any shape or form,
is never primitive. Amongst the Uaupes of Brazil
a girl at puberty is secluded in the house for a month,
and allowed only a small quantity of bread and water.
Then she is taken out into the midst of her relations
and friends, each of whom gives her four or five blows
with pieces of <foreign rend='italic'>sipo</foreign> (an elastic climber), till she falls
senseless or dead. If she recovers, the operation is
repeated four times at intervals of six hours, and it
is considered an offence to the parents not to strike
hard. Meantime, pots of meats and fish have been
made ready; the <foreign rend='italic'>sipos</foreign> are dipped into them and then
given to the girl to lick, who is now considered a
marriageable woman.<note place='foot'>A. R. Wallace, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of
Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro</hi>,
p. 496.</note>
</p>

<p>
When a Hindoo maiden reaches maturity she is
kept in a dark room for four days, and is forbidden to
see the sun. She is regarded as unclean; no one is
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
allowed to touch her. Her diet is restricted to boiled
rice, milk, sugar, curd, and tamarind without salt.<note place='foot'>Bose, <hi rend='italic'>The Hindoos as they are</hi>, p.
86. Similarly, after a Brahman boy
has been invested with the sacred
thread, he is for three days strictly
forbidden to see the sun. He may not
eat salt, and he is enjoined to sleep
either on a carpet or a deer's skin,
without a mattress or mosquito curtain.
<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 186. In Bali, boys who have
had their teeth filed, as a preliminary
to marriage, are kept shut up in a dark
room for three days. Van Eck,
<q>Schetsen van het eiland Bali,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië</hi>,
N. S. ix. (1880) 428 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Cambodia a girl at puberty is put to bed under
a mosquito curtain, where she should stay a hundred
days. Usually, however, four, five, ten, or twenty
days are thought enough; and even this, in a hot
climate and under the close meshes of the curtain, is
sufficiently trying.<note place='foot'>Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Royaume du Cambodge</hi>, i.
377.</note> According to another account, a
Cambodian maiden at puberty is said to <q>enter into
the shade.</q> During her retirement, which, according
to the rank and position of her family, may last any
time from a few days to several years, she has to
observe a number of rules, such as not to be seen by
a strange man, not to eat flesh or fish, and so on.
She goes nowhere, not even to the pagoda. But
this state of retirement is discontinued during eclipses;
at such times she goes forth and pays her devotions to
the monster who is supposed to cause eclipses by
catching the heavenly bodies between his teeth.<note place='foot'>Aymonier, <q>Notes sur les coutumes
et croyances superstitieuses des Cambodgiens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine Française, Excursions
et Reconnaissances</hi>, No. 16
(Saigon, 1883), p. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Notice sur le Cambodge</hi>, p. 50.</note> The
fact that her retirement is discontinued during an
eclipse seems to show how literally the injunction is
interpreted which forbids maidens entering on
womanhood to look upon the sun.
</p>

<p>
A superstition so widely diffused as this might be
expected to leave traces in legends and folk-tales.
And it has done so. In a modern Greek folk-tale
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
the Fates predict that in her fifteenth year a princess
must be careful not to let the sun shine on her, for if
this were to happen she would be turned into a lizard.<note place='foot'>B. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Märchen,
Sagen und Volkslieder</hi>, p. 98.</note>
A Tyrolese story tells how it was the doom of a lovely
maiden to be transported into the belly of a whale if
ever a sunbeam fell on her.<note place='foot'>Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen und Sagen aus
Wälschtirol</hi>, No. 22.</note> In another modern
Greek tale the Sun bestows a daughter upon a
childless woman on condition of taking the child
back to himself when she is twelve years old. So,
when the child was twelve, the mother closed the
doors and windows, and stopped up all the chinks
and crannies, to prevent the Sun from coming to
fetch away her daughter. But she forgot to stop
up the key-hole, and a sunbeam streamed through
it and carried off the girl.<note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische und
albanesische Märchen</hi>, No. 41.</note> In a Sicilian story a seer
foretells that a king will have a daughter who, in her
fourteenth year, will conceive a child by the Sun. So,
when the child was born, the king shut her up in a
lonely tower which had no window, lest a sunbeam
should fall on her. When she was nearly fourteen
years old, it happened that her parents sent her a
piece of roasted kid, in which she found a sharp bone.
With this bone she scraped a hole in the wall, and a
sunbeam shot through the hole and impregnated her.<note place='foot'>Gonzenbach, <hi rend='italic'>Sicilianische Märchen</hi>,
No. 28. The incident of the bone
occurs in other folk-tales. A prince
or princess is shut up for safety in a
tower and makes his or her escape by
scraping a hole in the wall with a bone
which has been accidentally conveyed
into the tower; sometimes it is expressly
said that care was taken to let the
princess have no bones with her meat.
Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> No. 15; Gonzenbach,
Nos. 26, 27; <hi rend='italic'>Pentamerone</hi>, No. 23.
From this we should infer that it is a
rule with savages not to let women
handle the bones of animals during
their monthly seclusions. We have already
seen the great respect with which
the savage treats the bones of game
(see above, p. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>); and women
in their courses are specially forbidden
to meddle with the hunter or fisher, as
their contact or neighbourhood would
spoil his sport (see below, p. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>)
In folk-tales the hero who uses the bone
is sometimes a boy; but the incident
might easily be transferred from a girl
to a boy after its real meaning had been
forgotten. Amongst the Hare-skin
Indians a girl at puberty is forbidden
to break the bones of hares. Petitot,
<hi rend='italic'>Traditions indiennes du Canada Nordouest</hi>,
p. 258. On the other hand, she
drinks out of a tube made of a swan's
bone (Petitot, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Monographie
des Dènè-Dindjié</hi>, p. 76), and we have
seen that a Thlinkeet girl in the same
circumstances used to drink out of the
wing-bone of a white-headed eagle
(Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um die Welt</hi>, ii.
114).</note>
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
The old Greek story of Danae, who was confined by
her father in a subterranean chamber or a brazen
tower, but impregnated by Zeus, who reached her
in the shape of a shower of gold, perhaps belongs
to the same class of tales. It has its counterpart in
the legend which the Kirgis of Siberia tell of their
ancestry. A certain Khan had a fair daughter, whom
he kept in a dark iron house, that no man might see
her. An old woman tended her; and when the girl
was grown to maidenhood she asked the old woman,
<q>Where do you go so often?</q>&mdash;<q>My child,</q> said the
old dame, <q>there is a bright world. In that bright
world your father and mother live, and all sorts of
people live there. That is where I go.</q> The maiden
said, <q>Good mother, I will tell nobody, but show me
that bright world.</q> So the old woman took the girl
out of the iron house. But when she saw the bright
world, the girl tottered and fainted; and the eye of
God fell upon her, and she conceived. Her angry
father put her in a golden chest and sent her floating
away (fairy gold can float in fairyland) over the wide
sea.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>Proben der Volkslitteratur
der türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</hi>,
iii. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The shower of gold in the Greek story, and the
eye of God in the Kirgis legend, probably stand for
sunlight and the sun. The idea that women may be
impregnated by the sun is not uncommon in legends,<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, i. 416, vi. 25; Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>,
p. 200; <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>,
ii. No. 797.</note>
and there are even traces of it in marriage customs.<note place='foot'>Amongst the Chaco Indians of
South America a newly-married couple
sleep the first night on a skin with
their heads towards the west; <q>for the
marriage is not considered as ratified
till the rising sun shines on their feet
the succeeding morning.</q> T. J. Hutchinson,
<q>The Chaco Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transact.
Ethnolog. Soc.</hi> iii. 327. At old Hindoo
marriages, the first ceremony was the
<q>Impregnation-rite</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Garbhādhāna</foreign>).
<q>During the previous day the young
married woman was made to look
towards the sun, or in some way exposed
to its rays.</q> Monier Williams,
<hi rend='italic'>Religious Life and Thought in India</hi>,
p. 354. Amongst the Turks of Siberia
it was formerly the custom on the
morning after marriage to lead the
young couple out of the hut to greet
the rising sun. The same custom is
said to be still practised in Iran and
Central Asia, the belief being that the
beams of the rising sun are the surest
means of impregnating the new bride.
Vambery, <hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi>, p. 112.</note>
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
The ground of this seclusion of girls at puberty lies
in the deeply engrained dread which primitive man
universally entertains of menstruous blood. Evidence
of this has already been adduced,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 170.</note> but a few more facts
may here be added. Amongst the Australian blacks
<q>the boys are told from their infancy that, if they see
the blood, they will early become gray-headed, and
their strength will fail prematurely.</q> Hence a woman
lives apart at these times; and if a young man or boy
approaches her she calls out, and he immediately
makes a circuit to avoid her. The men go out of
their way to avoid even crossing the tracks made
by women at such times. Similarly the woman may
not walk on any path frequented by men, nor touch
anything used by men; she may not eat fish, or go
near water at all, much less cross it; for if she did, the
fish would be frightened, and the fishers would have
no luck; she may not even fetch water for the camp;
it is sufficient for her to say <foreign rend='italic'>Thama</foreign> to ensure her
husband fetching the water himself. A severe beating,
or even death, is the punishment inflicted on an
Australian woman who breaks these rules.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 186; E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals</hi>, ii. 295,
304; W. Ridley, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi</hi>, p. 157;
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> ii. 268, ix. 459
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of Victoria</hi>,
i. 65, 236. Cp. Sir George
Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals</hi>, ii. 344; J. Dawson,
<hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>, ci. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
Bushmen think that, by a glance of a girl's eye
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
at the time when she ought to be kept in strict
retirement, men become fixed in whatever position
they happen to occupy, with whatever they were
holding in their hands, and are changed into trees
which talk.<note place='foot'>Bleek, <hi rend='italic'>Brief Account of Bushman Folk-lore</hi>, p. 14; cp. <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p. 10.</note> The Guayquiries of the Orinoco think
that, when a woman has her courses, everything
upon which she steps will die, and that if a man
treads on the place where she has passed, his legs
will immediately swell up.<note place='foot'>Gumilla, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Orénoque</hi>, i. 249.</note> The Creek and kindred
Indians of the United States compelled women at
menstruation to live in separate huts at some distance
from the village. There the women had to stay, at
the risk of being surprised and cut off by enemies.
It was thought <q>a most horrid and dangerous pollution</q>
to go near the women at such times; and the
danger extended to enemies who, if they slew the
women, had to cleanse themselves from the pollution
by means of certain sacred herbs and roots.<note place='foot'>James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American Indians</hi>, p. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly,
among the Chippeways and other Indians of the
Hudson Bay Territory, women at such seasons are
excluded from the camp, and take up their abode in
huts of branches. They wear long hoods, which
effectually conceal the head and breast. They may
not touch the household furniture nor any objects
used by men; for their touch <q>is supposed to defile
them, so that their subsequent use would be followed
by certain mischief or misfortune,</q> such as disease or
death. They may not walk on the common paths
nor cross the tracks of animals. They <q>are never
permitted to walk on the ice of rivers or lakes, or near
the part where the men are hunting beaver, or where
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
a fishing-net is set, for fear of averting their success.
They are also prohibited at those times from partaking
of the head of any animal, and even from walking in
or crossing the track where the head of a deer, moose,
beaver, and many other animals have lately been
carried, either on a sledge or on the back. To be
guilty of a violation of this custom is considered as of
the greatest importance; because they firmly believe
that it would be a means of preventing the hunter
from having an equal success in his future excursions.</q><note place='foot'>S. Hearne, <hi rend='italic'>Journey to the Northern
Ocean</hi>, p. 314 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Alex. Mackenzie,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages through the Continent of North
America</hi>, cxxiii.; Petitot, <hi rend='italic'>Monographie
des Dènè-Dindjié</hi>, p. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
So the Lapps forbid women at menstruation to walk
on that part of the shore where the fishers are in the
habit of setting out their fish.<note place='foot'>C. Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae
eorumque lingua vita et religione
pristina</hi> (Copenhagen, 1767), p. 494.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst the civilised nations of Europe the superstitions
which have prevailed on this subject are not
less extravagant. In the oldest existing cyclopaedia&mdash;the
<hi rend='italic'>Natural History</hi> of Pliny&mdash;the list of dangers
apprehended from menstruation is longer than any
furnished by savages. According to Pliny, the touch
of a menstruous woman turned wine to vinegar, blighted
crops, killed seedlings, blasted gardens, brought down
the fruit from trees, dimmed mirrors, blunted razors,
rusted iron and brass (especially at the waning of the
moon), killed bees, or at least drove them from their
hives, caused mares to miscarry, and so forth.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> vii. § 64 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
xxviii. § 77 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Cp. <hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xii.
c. 20, 5, and c. 25, 2; Columella, xi.
3, 50.</note>
Similarly, in various parts of Europe, it is still
believed that if a woman in her courses enters a
brewery the beer will turn sour; if she touches beer,
wine, vinegar, or milk, it will go bad; if she makes
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
jam, it will not keep; if she mounts a mare, it will
miscarry; if she touches buds, they will wither; if
she climbs a cherry-tree, it will die.<note place='foot'>A. Schleicher, <hi rend='italic'>Volkstümliches aus
Sonnenberg</hi>; p. 134; B. Souché, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances,
Présages et Traditions diverses</hi>, p.
11; V. Fossel, <hi rend='italic'>Volksmedicin und
medicinischer Aberglaube in Steiermark</hi>
(Graz, 1886), p. 124. The
Greeks and Romans thought that a
field was completely protected against
insects if a menstruous woman walked
round it with bare feet and streaming
hair. Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvii. 266,
xxviii. 78; Columella, x. 358 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
xi. 3, 64; Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, i.
35, 3; <hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xii. 8, 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Aelian,
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> vi. 36. A similar remedy
is employed for the same purpose by
North American Indians and European
peasants. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>,
v. 70; Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi>, p. 484.
Cp. Haltrich, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde der
Siebenbürger Sachsen</hi>, p. 280; Heinrich,
<hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten und Gebräuche
unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</hi>, p.
14; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> iii.
468.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus the object of secluding women at menstruation
is to neutralise the dangerous influences which are supposed
to emanate from them at such times. That the
danger is believed to be especially great at the first menstruation
appears from the unusual precautions taken
to isolate girls at this crisis. Two of these precautions
have been illustrated above, namely, the rules that the
girl may not touch the ground nor see the sun. The
general effect of these rules is to keep the girl suspended,
so to say, between heaven and earth. Whether enveloped
in her hammock and slung up to the roof, as in
South America, or elevated above the ground in a dark
and narrow cage, as in New Ireland, she may be considered
to be out of the way of doing mischief, since,
being shut off both from the earth and from the sun,
she can poison neither of these great sources of life by
her deadly contagion. In short, she is rendered harmless
by being, in electrical language, insulated. But
the precautions thus taken to isolate or insulate the girl
are dictated by a regard for her own safety as well as
for the safety of others. For it is thought that the girl
herself would suffer if she were to neglect the prescribed
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
regimen. Thus Zulu girls, as we have seen, believe
that they would shrivel to skeletons if the sun were to
shine on them at puberty, and in some Brazilian tribes
the girls think that a transgression of the rules would
entail sores on the neck and throat. In short, the girl
is viewed as charged with a powerful force which, if
not kept within bounds, may prove the destruction both
of the girl herself and of all with whom she comes in
contact. To repress this force within the limits necessary
for the safety of all concerned is the object of the
taboos in question.
</p>

<p>
The same explanation applies to the observance of
the same rules by divine kings and priests. The uncleanness,
as it is called, of girls at puberty and the
sanctity of holy men do not, to the primitive mind,
differ from each other. They are only different manifestations
of the same supernatural energy which, like
energy in general, is in itself neither good nor bad,
but becomes beneficent or maleficent according to its
application.<note place='foot'>For an example of the beneficent application of the menstrual energy,
see note on p. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>.</note> Accordingly, if, like girls at puberty,
divine personages may neither touch the ground nor see
the sun, the reason is, on the one hand, a fear lest their
divinity might, at contact with earth or heaven, discharge
itself with fatal violence on either; and, on the
other hand, an apprehension, that the divine being,
thus drained of his ethereal virtue, might thereby be
incapacitated for the future performance of those supernatural
functions, upon the proper discharge of which
the safety of the people and even of the world is believed
to hang. Thus the rules in question fall under
the head of the taboos which we examined in the
second chapter; they are intended to preserve the life
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
of the divine person and with it the life of his subjects
and worshippers. Nowhere, it is thought, can his
precious yet dangerous life be at once so safe and so
harmless as when it is neither in heaven nor in earth,
but, as far as possible, suspended between the two.<note place='foot'>The rules just discussed do not
hold exclusively of the persons mentioned
in the text, but are applicable in
certain circumstances to other tabooed
persons and things. Whatever, in fact,
is permeated by the mysterious virtue
of taboo may need to be isolated from
earth and heaven. Mourners are taboo
all the world over; accordingly in
mourning the Ainos wear peculiar caps
in order that the sun may not shine
upon their heads. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker
des östlichen Asien</hi>, v. 366. During a
solemn fast of three days the Indians
of Costa Rica eat no salt, speak as little
as possible, light no fires, and stay
strictly indoors, or if they go out during
the day they carefully cover themselves
from the light of the sun, believing that
exposure to the sun's rays would turn
them black. W. M. Gabb, <hi rend='italic'>Indian
Tribes and Languages of Costa Rica</hi>,
p. 510. On Yule night it has been
customary in parts of Sweden from
time immemorial to go on pilgrimage,
whereby people learn many secret
things and know what is to happen
in the coming year. As a preparation
for this pilgrimage, <q>some secrete themselves
for three days previously in a
dark cellar, so as to be shut out altogether
from the light of heaven. Others
retire at an early hour of the preceding
morning to some out-of-the way place,
such as a hayloft, where they bury
themselves in the hay, that they may
neither hear nor see any living creature;
and here they remain, in silence and
fasting, until after sundown; whilst
there are those who think it sufficient
if they rigidly abstain from food on the
day before commencing their wanderings.
During this period of probation
a man ought not to see fire.</q> L. Lloyd,
<hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>, p. 194. During
the sixteen days that a Pima Indian
is undergoing purification for killing an
Apache he may not see a blazing fire.
Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific
States</hi>, i. 553. Again warriors on the
war-path are strictly taboo; hence
Indians may not sit on the bare ground
the whole time they are out on a warlike
expedition. J. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of
the American Indians</hi>, p. 382; <hi rend='italic'>Narrative
of the Captivity and Adventures of
John Tanner</hi>, p. 123. The holy ark
of the North American Indians is
deemed <q>so sacred and dangerous to
be touched</q> that no one, except the
war chief and his attendant, will touch
it <q>under the penalty of incurring
great evil. Nor would the most
inveterate enemy touch it in the woods
for the very same reason.</q> In carrying
it against the enemy they never place
it on the ground, but rest it on stones
or logs. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi>, p. 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The sacred clam
shell of the Elk clan among the Omahas
is kept in a sacred bag, which is never
allowed to touch the ground. E. James,
<hi rend='italic'>Expedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky
Mountains</hi>, ii. 47; J. Owen Dorsey,
<q>Omaha Sociology,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Third Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1884), p. 226. Newly born infants
are strongly taboo; accordingly in
Loango they are not allowed to touch
the earth. Pechuel-Loesche, <q>Indiscretes
aus Loango,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie</hi>, x. (1878) p. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In
Laos the hunting of elephants gives
rise to many taboos; one of them is
that the chief hunter may not touch the
earth with his foot. Accordingly when
he alights from his elephant, the others
spread a carpet of leaves for him to
step upon. E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le
Laos</hi>, p. 26. In some parts of Aberdeenshire,
the last bit of standing corn
(which, as we have seen, is very sacred)
is not allowed to touch the ground;
but as it is cut, it is placed on the lap
of the <q>gueedman.</q> W. Gregor,
<q>Quelques coutumes du Nord-Est du
Comté d'Aberdeen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions
populaires</hi>, iii. (1888) 485 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.
Sacred food may not, in certain circumstances,
touch the ground. F.
Grabowsky, <q>Der Distrikt Dusson
Timor in Südost-Borneo und seine
Bewohner,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ausland</hi> (1884), No. 24,
p. 474; Ch. F. Hall, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
Second Arctic Expedition</hi>, edited by
Prof. J. E. Nourse (Washington, 1879),
p. 110; Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi>, ii. 7. In Scotland, when water
was carried from sacred wells to sick
people, the water-vessel might not touch
the ground. C. F. Gordon Cumming,
<hi rend='italic'>In the Hebrides</hi>, p. 211. On the relation
of spirits to the ground, compare
Denzil Ibbetson in <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and
Queries</hi>, i. No. 5.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Balder.'/>
<head>§ 2.&mdash;Balder.</head>

<p>
A god whose life might in a sense be said to be
neither in heaven nor earth but between the two, was
the Norse Balder, the good and beautiful god. The
story of his death is as follows: Once on a time
Balder dreamed heavy dreams which seemed to forebode
his death. Thereupon the gods held a council
and resolved to make him secure against every danger.
So the goddess Frigg took an oath from fire and water,
iron and all metals, stones and earth, from trees, sicknesses
and poisons, and from all four-footed beasts, birds,
and creeping things, that they would not hurt Balder.
When this was done Balder was deemed invulnerable;
so the gods amused themselves by setting him in their
midst, while some shot at him, others hewed at him,
and others threw stones at him. But whatever they
did, nothing could hurt him; and at this they were all
glad. Only Loki, the mischief-maker, was displeased,
and he went in the guise of an old woman to Frigg,
who told him that the weapons of the gods could not
wound Balder, since she had made them all swear not
to hurt him. Then Loki asked, <q>Have all things
sworn to spare Balder?</q> She answered, <q>East of Walhalla
grows a plant called mistletoe; it seemed to me too
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
young to swear.</q> So Loki went and pulled the mistletoe
and took it to the assembly of the gods. There he
found the blind god Hödur standing at the outside of
the circle. Loki asked him, <q>Why do you not shoot
at Balder?</q> Hödur answered, <q>Because I do not
see where he stands; besides I have no weapon.</q>
Then said Loki, <q>Do like the rest and show Balder
honour, as they all do. I will show you where he
stands, and do you shoot at him with this twig.</q> Hödur
took the mistletoe and threw it at Balder, as Loki
directed him. The mistletoe struck Balder and pierced
him through and through, and he fell down dead. And
that was the greatest misfortune that ever befel gods
and men. For a while the gods stood speechless, then
they lifted up their voices and wept bitterly. They
took Balder's body and brought it to the sea-shore.
There stood Balder's ship; it was called Ringhorn,
and was the hugest of all ships. The gods wished to
launch the ship and to burn Balder's body on it, but
the ship would not stir. So they sent for a giantess
called Hyrrockin. She came riding on a wolf and gave
the ship such a push that fire flashed from the rollers
and all the earth shook. Then Balder's body was
taken and placed on the funeral pile upon his ship.
When his wife Nanna saw that, her heart burst for
sorrow and she died. So she was laid on the funeral
pile with her husband, and fire was put to it. Balder's
horse, too, with all its trappings, was burned on the
pile.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Edda</hi>, übersetzt von K. Simrock,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi>
pp. 286-288, cp. pp. 8, 34, 264.
In English the Balder story is told at
length by Prof. Rhys, <hi rend='italic'>Celtic Heathendom</hi>,
p. 529 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The circumstantiality of this story suggests that it
belongs to the extensive class of myths which are invented
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
to explain ritual. For a myth is never so
graphic and precise in its details as when it is a simple
transcript of a ceremony which the author of the myth
witnessed with his eyes. At all events, if it can be
made probable that rites like those described in the
Balder myth have been practised by Norsemen and by
other European peoples, we shall be justified in inferring
that the ritual gave birth to the myth, not the
myth to the ritual. For while many cases can be
shown in which a myth has been invented to explain
a rite, it would be hard to point to a single case in
which a myth has given rise to a rite. Ritual may
be the parent of myth, but can never be its child.<note place='foot'>It is strange to find so learned and
judicious a student of custom and myth
as H. Usener exactly inverting their
true relation to each other. After
showing that the essential features of
the myth of the marriage of Mars and
Nerio have their counterpart in the
marriage customs of peasants at the
present day, he proceeds to infer that
these customs are the reflection of the
myth. <q>Italische Mythen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches
Museum</hi>, N. F. xxx. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Surely
the myth is the reflection of the custom.
Men not only fashion gods in their
own likeness (as Xenophanes long ago
remarked) but make them think and
act like themselves. Heaven is a copy
of earth, not earth of heaven.</note>
</p>

<p>
The main incidents in the myth of Balder's death
are two; first, the pulling of the mistletoe, and second,
the death and burning of the god. Now both these
incidents appear to have formed parts of an annual
ceremony once observed by Celts and Norsemen,
probably also by Germans and Slavs.
</p>

<p>
In most parts of Europe the peasants have been
accustomed from time immemorial to kindle bonfires
on certain days of the year, and to dance round them
or leap over them. Customs of this kind can be
traced back on historical evidence to the Middle Ages,<note place='foot'>See Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 502, 510, 516.</note>
and their analogy to similar customs observed in antiquity
goes with strong internal evidence to prove
that their origin must be sought in a period long
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
prior to the spread of Christianity. Indeed the earliest
evidence of their observance in Northern Europe is
furnished by the attempts made by Christian synods
in the eighth century to put them down as heathenish
rites.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 518 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Not uncommonly effigies are burned in these
fires, or a pretence is made of burning a living person
in them; and there are grounds for believing that
anciently human beings were actually burned on these
occasions. A brief review of the customs in question
will bring out the traces of human sacrifice, and
will serve at the same time to throw light on their
meaning.<note place='foot'>In the following survey of these
fire-customs I follow chiefly W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, kap. vi. p. 497
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare also Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 500 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The seasons of the year at which these bonfires
are most commonly lit are spring and midsummer, but
in some places they are kindled at Hallow E'en
(October 31st) and Christmas. In spring the first
Sunday in Lent (Quadragesima) and Easter Eve are
the days on which in different places the ceremony is
observed. Thus in the Eifel Mountains, Rhenish
Prussia, on the first Sunday in Lent young people
used to collect straw and brushwood from house to
house. These they carried to an eminence and piled
them up round a tall, slim, beech-tree, to which a piece
of wood was fastened at right angles to form a cross.
The structure was known as the <q>hut</q> or <q>castle.</q>
Fire was set to it and the young people marched round
the blazing <q>castle</q> bareheaded, each carrying a
lighted torch and praying aloud. Sometimes a straw
man was burned in the <q>hut.</q> People observed the
direction in which the smoke blew from the fire. If it
blew towards the corn-fields, it was a sign that the
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
harvest would be abundant. On the same day, in
some parts of the Eifel, a great wheel was made of
straw and dragged by three horses to the top of a hill.
Thither the village boys marched at nightfall, set fire
to the wheel, and sent it rolling down the slope. Two
lads followed it with levers to set it in motion again,
in case it should anywhere meet with a check.<note place='foot'>Schmitz, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Sagen</hi> etc. <hi rend='italic'>des
Eifler Volkes</hi>, i. pp. 21-25; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p.
501.</note> About
Echternach the same ceremony is called <q>burning the
witch.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 501.</note> At Voralberg in the Tyrol on the first Sunday
in Lent a slender young fir-tree is surrounded with a
pile of straw and fire-wood. At the top of the tree
is fastened a human figure called the <q>witch</q>; it is
made of old clothes and stuffed with gunpowder. At
night the whole is set on fire and boys and girls dance
round it, swinging torches and singing rhymes in which
the words <q>corn in the winnowing-basket, the plough
in the earth</q> may be distinguished.<note place='foot'>Vonbun, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, p. 20; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 501.</note> In Swabia on
the first Sunday in Lent a figure called the <q>witch</q>
or the <q>old wife</q> or <q>winter's grandmother</q> is made
up of clothes and fastened to a pole. This is stuck in
the middle of a pile of wood, to which fire is applied.
While the <q>witch</q> is burning the young people throw
blazing discs into the air. The discs are thin round
pieces of wood, a few inches in diameter, with notched
edges to imitate the rays of the sun or stars. They
have a hole in the middle, by which they are attached
to the end of a wand. Before the disc is thrown it is
set on fire, the wand is swung to and fro, and the
impetus thus communicated to the disc is augmented
by dashing the rod sharply against a sloping board.
The burning disc is thus thrown off, and mounting
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
high into the air, describes a long curve before it
reaches the ground. A single lad may fling up forty
or fifty of these discs, one after the other. The object
is to throw them as high as possible. The wand by
which they are hurled must, at least in some parts of
Swabia, be of hazel. Sometimes the lads also leap
over the fire brandishing blazing torches of pine-wood.
The charred embers of the burned <q>witch</q> and discs
are taken home and planted in the flax-fields the same
night, in the belief that they will keep vermin from
the fields.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 380
<hi rend='italic'>sqq</hi>.; Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> , 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria</hi>,
ii. 2, p. 838 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 211, No.
232, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 501 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Rhön Mountains, Bavaria, on the
first Sunday in Lent the people used to march to the
top of a hill or eminence. Children and lads carried
torches, brooms daubed with tar, and poles swathed in
straw. A wheel, wrapt in combustibles, was kindled
and rolled down the hill; and the young people rushed
about the fields with their burning torches and brooms,
till at last they flung them in a heap, and standing
round them, struck up a hymn or a popular song.
The object of running about the fields with the blazing
torches was to <q>drive away the wicked sower.</q> Or it
was done in honour of the Virgin, that she might
preserve the fruits of the earth throughout the year
and bless them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Witzschel, Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 189; Panzer,
<hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii.
207; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 500 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
It seems hardly possible to separate from these
bonfires, kindled on the first Sunday in Lent, the fires
in which, about the same season, the effigy called
Death is burned as part of the ceremony of <q>carrying
out Death.</q> We have seen that at Spachendorf,
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
Austrian Silesia, on the morning of Rupert's Day
(Shrove Tuesday?) a straw-man, dressed in a fur coat
and a fur cap, is laid in a hole outside the village and
there burned, and that while it is blazing every one
seeks to snatch a fragment of it, which he fastens to
a branch of the highest tree in his garden or buries in
his field, believing that this will make the crops to
grow better. The ceremony is known as the <q>burying
of Death.</q><note place='foot'>Th. Vernalcken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und
Bräuche des Volkes in Oesterreich</hi>, p. 293
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 498. See above, vol. i.
p. 267.</note> Even when the straw-man is not designated
as Death, the meaning of the observance is
probably the same; for the name Death, as I have
tried to show, does not express the original intention
of the ceremony. At Cobern in the Eifel
Mountains the lads make up a straw-man on Shrove
Tuesday. The effigy is formally tried and accused
of having perpetrated all the thefts that have been
committed in the neighbourhood throughout the
year. Being condemned to death, the straw-man is led
through the village, shot, and burned upon a pyre. They
dance round the blazing pile, and the last bride must
leap over it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Schmitz, Sitten, u. Sagen des
Eifler Volkes</hi>, i. p. 20; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 499.</note> In Oldenburg on the evening of Shrove
Tuesday people used to make long bundles of straw,
which they set on fire, and then ran about the fields
waving them, shrieking, and singing wild songs.
Finally they burnt a straw-man on the field.<note place='foot'>Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube u. Sagen
aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>, ii.
39, No. 306; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 499.</note> In
the district of Düsseldorf the straw-man burned on
Shrove Tuesday was made of an unthreshed sheaf of
corn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 499.</note> On the first Monday after the spring equinox
the urchins of Zurich drag a straw-man on a little cart
through the streets, while at the same time the girls
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
carry about a May-tree. When vespers ring, the
straw-man is burned.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 498 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the district of Aachen on
Ash Wednesday a man used to be encased in peas-straw
and taken to an appointed place. Here he
slipped quietly out of his straw casing, which was then
burned, the children thinking that it was the man who
was being burned.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 499.</note> In the Val di Ledro (Tyrol) on
the last day of the Carnival a figure is made up of
straw and brushwood and then burned. The figure is
called the Old Woman, and the ceremony <q>burning
the Old Woman.</q><note place='foot'>Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen u. Sagen aus Wälschtirol</hi>, p. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 499 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Another occasion on which these fire-festivals are
held is Easter Eve, the Saturday before Easter Sunday.
On that day it has been customary in Catholic
countries to extinguish all the lights in the churches,
and then to make a new fire, sometimes with flint and
steel, sometimes with a burning-glass. At this fire is
lit the Easter candle, which is then used to rekindle all
the extinguished lights in the church. In many parts
of Germany a bonfire is also kindled, by means of the
new fire, on some open space near the church. It is
consecrated, and the people bring sticks of oak, walnut,
and beech, which they char in the fire, and then take
home with them. Some of these charred sticks are
thereupon burned at home in a newly-kindled fire, with
a prayer that God will preserve the homestead from
fire, lightning, and hail. Thus every house receives
<q>new fire.</q> Some of the sticks are placed in the
fields, gardens, and meadows, with a prayer that God
will keep them from blight and hail. Such fields and
gardens are thought to thrive more than others; the
corn and the plants that grow in them are not beaten
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
down by hail, nor devoured by mice, vermin, and
beetles, no witch harms them, and the ears of corn
stand close and full. The charred sticks are also
applied to the plough. The ashes of the Easter bonfire,
together with the ashes of the consecrated palm-branches,
are mixed with the seed at sowing. A
wooden figure called Judas is sometimes burned in the
consecrated bonfire.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> pp. 502-505; Wuttke,
<hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> § 81;
Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen
des Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 149, §§ 1286-1289;
<hi rend='italic'>Bavaria</hi>, i. 1, p. 371.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes instead of the consecrated bonfire a
profane fire used to be kindled on Easter Eve. In
the afternoon the lads of the village collected firewood
and carried it to a corn-field or to the top of a hill.
Here they piled it together and fastened in the midst
of it a pole with a cross-piece, all wrapt in straw, so
that it looked like a man with outstretched arms. This
figure was called the Easter-man, or the Judas. In
the evening the lads lit their lanterns at the new holy
fire in the church, and ran at full speed to the pile.
The one who reached it first set fire to it and to the
effigy. No women or girls might be present, though
they were allowed to watch the scene from a distance.
Great was the joy while the effigy was burning. The
ashes were collected and thrown at sunrise into running
water, or were scattered over the fields on Easter
Monday. At the same time the palm branches which
had been consecrated on Palm Sunday, and sticks
which had been charred in the fire and consecrated on
Good Friday, were also stuck up in the fields. The
object was to preserve the fields from hail.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, i. p. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. p. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 505.</note> In Münsterland,
these Easter fires are always kindled upon
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
certain definite hills, which are hence known as Easter
or Pascal Mountains. The whole community assembles
about the fire. Fathers of families form an inner circle
round it. An outer circle is formed by the young men
and maidens, who, singing Easter hymns, march round
and round the fire in the direction of the sun, till the
blaze dies down. Then the girls jump over the fire in
a line, one after the other, each supported by two
young men who hold her hands and run beside her.
When the fire has burned out, the whole assemblage
marches in solemn procession to the church, singing
hymns. They march thrice round the church, and
then break up. In the twilight boys with blazing
bundles of straw run over the fields to make them
fruitful.<note place='foot'>Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und Sagen
aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>, ii. p.
43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 313; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 505 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Holland, also, Easter fires used to be
kindled on the highest eminences, the people danced
round them, and leaped through the flames.<note place='foot'>Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 506.</note> In
Schaumburg, the Easter bonfires may be seen blazing
on all the mountains around for miles. They are made
with a tar barrel fastened to a pine-tree, which is wrapt
in straw. The people dance singing round them.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i.
512; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 506 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Easter bonfires are also common in the Harz Mountains
and in Brunswick, Hanover, and Westphalia. They
are generally lit upon particular heights and mountains
which are hence called Easter Mountains. In
the Harz the fire is commonly made by piling brushwood
about a tree and setting it on fire, and blazing
tar barrels are often rolled down into the valley. In
Osterode, every one tries to snatch a brand from
the bonfire and rushes about with it; the better it
burns, the more lucky it is. In Grund there are torch
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
races.<note place='foot'>H. Pröhle, <hi rend='italic'>Harzbilder</hi>, p. 63; Kuhn
und Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen,
Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>, p. 373; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi>
p. 507.</note> In the Altmark, the Easter bonfires are composed
of tar barrels, bee-hives, etc., piled round a pole.
The young folk dance round the fire; and when it has
died out, the old folk come and collect the ashes, which
they preserve as a remedy for the ailments of bees.
It is also believed that as far as the blaze of the bonfire
is visible, the corn will grow well throughout the
year, and no conflagration will break out.<note place='foot'>Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Markische Sagen und
Märchen</hi>, p. 312 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 507.</note> In some
parts of Bavaria, bonfires were kindled at Easter
upon steep mountains, and burning arrows or discs of
wood were shot high into the air, as in the Swabian
custom already described. Sometimes, instead of the
discs, an old waggon wheel was wrapt in straw, set on
fire, and sent rolling down the mountain. The lads
who hurled the discs received painted Easter eggs
from the girls.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
i. p. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 507 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts of Swabia the Easter
fires might not be kindled with iron or flint or steel;
but only by the friction of wood.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. p. 82, No. 106; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p.
508.</note> At Braunröde in
the Harz Mountains it was the custom to burn squirrels
in the Easter bonfire.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 508; cp. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
deutsch. Myth.</hi> i. 74; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Myth.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 512. The two latter writers
only state that before the fires were
kindled it was customary to hunt
squirrels in the woods.</note> In the Altmark, bones were
burned in it.<note place='foot'>Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 508.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the central Highlands of Scotland bonfires,
known as the Beltane fires, were formerly kindled
with great ceremony on the 1st of May, and the
traces of human sacrifices at them were particularly
clear and unequivocal. In the neighbourhood of
Callander, in Perthshire, the custom lasted down to
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
the close of last century. The fires were lit by the
people of each hamlet on a hill or knoll round which
their cattle were pasturing. Hence various eminences
in the Highlands are known as <q>the hill of the fires,</q>
just as in Germany some mountains take their name
from the Easter fires which are kindled upon them.
On the morning of May Day the people repaired to
a hill or knoll and cut a round trench in the green
sod, leaving in the centre a platform of turf large
enough to contain the whole company. On this turf
they seated themselves, and in the middle was placed a
pile of wood or other fuel, which of old they kindled
with <foreign rend='italic'>tein-eigin</foreign>&mdash;that is, forced fire or need-fire. The
way of making the need-fire was this: <q>The night
before, all the fires in the country were carefully
extinguished, and next morning the materials for
exciting this sacred fire were prepared. The most
primitive method seems to be that which was used
in the islands of Skye, Mull, and Tiree. A well-seasoned
plank of oak was procured, in the midst of
which a hole was bored. A wimble of the same
timber was then applied, the end of which they fitted
to the hole. But in some parts of the mainland the
machinery was different. They used a frame of
green wood, of a square form, in the centre of which
was an axle-tree. In some places three times three
persons, in others three times nine, were required for
turning round, by turns, the axle-tree or wimble. If
any of them had been guilty of murder, adultery,
theft, or other atrocious crime, it was imagined either
that the fire would not kindle, or that it would be
devoid of its usual virtue. So soon as any sparks
were emitted by means of the violent friction, they
applied a species of agaric which grows on old birch-trees,
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
and is very combustible. This fire had the
appearance of being immediately derived from heaven,
and manifold were the virtues ascribed to it. They
esteemed it a preservative against witchcraft, and a
sovereign remedy against malignant diseases, both in
the human species and in cattle; and by it the
strongest poisons were supposed to have their nature
changed.</q> For many years, however, before the close
of last century, the Beltane fires were kindled in the
usual way. The fire being lit, the company prepared a
custard of eggs and milk, which they ate. Afterwards
they amused themselves a while by singing and
dancing round the fire. Then <q>they knead a cake
of oatmeal, which is toasted at the embers against a
stone. After the custard is eaten up they divide the
cake into so many portions, as similar as possible to
one another in size and shape, as there are persons in
the company. They daub one of these portions all
over with charcoal until it be perfectly black. They
put all the bits of cake into a bonnet. Every one,
blindfold, draws out a portion. He who holds the
bonnet is entitled to the last bit. Whoever draws
the black bit is the devoted person who is to be
sacrificed to <foreign rend='italic'>Baal</foreign>, whose favour they mean to implore,
in rendering the year productive of the sustenance of
man and beast.</q> The victim thus selected <q>was
called <foreign rend='italic'>cailleach bealtine</foreign>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Beltane <foreign rend='italic'>carline</foreign>, a
term of great reproach. Upon his being known, part
of the company laid hold of him, and made a show of
putting him into the fire; but, the majority interposing,
he was rescued. And in some places they
laid him flat on the ground, making as if they would
quarter him. Afterwards he was pelted with eggshells,
and retained the odious appellation during the
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
whole year. And, while the feast was fresh in people's
memory, they affected to speak of the <foreign rend='italic'>cailleach bealtine</foreign>
as dead.</q> He had to leap thrice through the flames,
and this concluded the ceremony.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i. 224
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, Bohn's ed., quoting Sinclair's
<hi rend='italic'>Statistical Account of Scotland</hi>, 1794,
xi. 620; <hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen in the
Eighteenth Century</hi>, from the MSS. of
John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, edited by
Alex. Allardyce, ii. 439-445; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi>
p. 508.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another account of the Beltane festival, written in
the latter half of last century, is as follows: <q>On the 1st
of May the herdsmen of every village hold their Beltien,
a rural sacrifice. They cut a square trench on the
ground, leaving the turf in the middle; on that they
make a fire of wood, on which they dress a large caudle
of eggs, butter, oatmeal, and milk, and bring, besides the
ingredients of the caudle, plenty of beer and whisky;
for each of the company must contribute something.
The rites begin with spilling some of the caudle on
the ground, by way of libation; on that every one
takes a cake of oatmeal, upon which are raised nine
square knobs, each dedicated to some particular being,
the supposed preserver of their flocks and herds, or to
some particular animal, the real destroyer of them;
each person then turns his face to the fire, breaks off a
knob, and, flinging it over his shoulder, says, <q>This I
give to thee, preserve thou my horses; this to thee,
preserve thou my sheep; and so on.</q> After that they
use the same ceremony to the noxious animals: <q>This
I give to thee, O fox! spare thou my lambs; this to
thee, O hooded crow! this to thee, O eagle!</q> When
the ceremony is over they dine on the caudle; and,
after the feast is finished, what is left is hid by two
persons deputed for that purpose; but on the next
Sunday they reassemble, and finish the reliques of the
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
first entertainment.</q><note place='foot'>Pennant, <q>Tour in Scotland,</q>
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii.
49; Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i.
226.</note> The 1st of May is a great
popular festival in the more midland and southern
parts of Sweden. On the preceding evening huge
bonfires, which should be lighted by striking two
flints together, blaze on all the hills and knolls.
Every large hamlet has its own fire, round which the
young people dance in a ring. The old folk notice
whether the flames incline to the north or to the south.
In the former case the spring will be cold and backward;
in the latter mild and genial.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>,
p. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
But the season at which these fire-festivals are
most generally held all over Europe is the summer
solstice, that is, Midsummer Eve (23d June) or Midsummer
Day (24th June). According to a mediæval
writer the three great features of this festival were
the bonfires, the procession with torches round the
fields, and the custom of rolling a wheel. The writer
adds that the smoke drives away harmful dragons
which cause sickness, and he explains the custom of
rolling the wheel to mean that the sun has now reached
the highest point in the ecliptic, and begins thenceforward
to descend.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 509; Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Pop. Antiq.</hi>
i. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 516.</note> From his description, which is
still applicable, we see that the main features of the
midsummer fire-festival are identical with those which
characterise the spring festivals. In Swabia lads and
lasses, hand in hand, leap over the midsummer bonfire,
praying that the hemp may grow three ells high, and
they set fire to wheels of straw and send them rolling
down the hill.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. p. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> No. 128, p.
103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> No. 129; E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus
Schwaben</hi>, p. 423 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 510.</note> In Lechrain bonfires are kindled on
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
the mountains on Midsummer Day; and besides the
bonfire a tall beam, thickly wrapt in straw, and surmounted
by a cross-piece, is burned in many places.
Round this cross, as it burns, the lads dance; and when
the flames have subsided, the young people leap over
the fire in pairs, a young man and a young woman
together. It is believed that the flax will grow that
year as high as they leap over the fire; and that if a
charred billet be taken from the fire and stuck in a flax
field it will promote the growth of the flax.<note place='foot'>Leoprechting, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem Lechrain</hi>,
p. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 510. Cp. Panzer,
<hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i.
210; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria</hi>, iii. 956.</note> At Deffingen,
as they jumped over the midsummer bonfire,
they cried out, <q>Flax, flax! may the flax this year grow
seven ells high!</q><note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 549.</note> In Bohemia bonfires are kindled
on many of the mountains on Midsummer Eve; boys
and girls, hand in hand, leap over them; cart-wheels
smeared with resin are ignited and sent rolling down
the hill; and brooms covered with tar and set on fire
are swung about or thrown high into the air. The
handles of the brooms or embers from the fire are
preserved and stuck in gardens to protect the
vegetables from caterpillars and gnats. Sometimes
the boys run down the hillside in troops, brandishing
the blazing brooms and shouting. The bonfire is
sometimes made by stacking wood and branches round
the trunk of a tree and setting the whole on fire.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender
aus Böhmen</hi>, pp. 306-311; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi>
p. 510. For the custom of burning
a tree in the midsummer bonfires, see
vol. i. p. 79.</note>
</p>

<p>
In old farm-houses of the Surenthal and Winenthal
a couple of holes or a whole row of them may sometimes
be seen facing each other in the door-posts of the
barn or stable. Sometimes the holes are smooth and
round; sometimes they are deeply burnt and blackened.
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
The explanation of them is this. About midsummer,
but especially on Midsummer Day, two such holes are
bored opposite each other, into which the extremities
of a strong pole are fixed. The holes are then stuffed
with tow steeped in resin and oil; a rope is looped
round the pole, and two young men, who must be
brothers or must have the same baptismal name, and
must be of the same age, pull the ends of the rope
backwards and forwards so as to make the pole revolve
rapidly, till smoke and sparks issue from the two holes
in the door-posts. The sparks are caught and blown
up with tinder, and this is the new and pure fire, the
appearance of which is greeted with cries of joy.
Heaps of combustible materials are now ignited with
the new fire, and blazing bundles are placed on boards
and sent floating down the brook. The boys light
torches at the new fire and run to fumigate the pastures.
This is believed to drive away all the demons
and witches that molest the cattle. Finally the torches
are thrown in a heap on the meadow and allowed to
burn out. On their way back the boys strew the ashes
over the fields: this is supposed to make them fertile.
If a farmer has taken possession of a new house, or if servants
have changed masters, the boys fumigate the new
abode and are rewarded by the farmer with a supper.<note place='foot'>Rochholz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und Brauch</hi>, ii. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
At Konz, on the Moselle, the midsummer fire-festival
used to be celebrated as follows. A quantity
of straw, contributed jointly by every house, was
collected on the top of the Stromberg Hill. Here,
towards evening, the men and boys assembled, while
the women and girls took up their position at a certain
well down below. On the top of the hill a huge
wheel was completely covered with a portion of the
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
collected straw, the remainder of which was made into
torches. The mayor of Sierk, who always received a
basket of cherries for his services, gave the signal, the
wheel was ignited with a torch, and sent rolling down
the hill amid shouts of joy. All the men and boys
swung their torches in the air, some of them remained
on the top of the hill, while others followed the fiery
wheel on its course down the hillside to the Moselle.
As it passed the women and girls at the well they raised
cries of joy which were answered by the men on the
top of the hill. The inhabitants of the neighbouring
villages also stood on the banks of the river and mingled
their voices with the general shout of jubilation. The
wheel was often extinguished before it reached the
water, but if it plunged blazing into the river the people
expected an abundant vintage, and the inhabitants of
Konz had the right to exact a waggon-load of white
wine from the surrounding vineyards.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 515 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi>
p. 510 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In France the midsummer customs are similar. In
Poitou a wheel enveloped in straw is set on fire, and
people run with it through the fields, which are supposed
to be fertilised thereby; also, the people leap thrice over
the fire, holding in their hands branches of nut-trees,
which are afterwards hung over the door of the cattle-stall.
At Brest torches are brandished, and hundreds of
them flung up into the air together.<note place='foot'>Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
ii. 393; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 517;
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 511.</note> In Britanny midsummer
fires blaze on the hills, the people dance round
them, singing and leaping over the glowing embers.
The bonfire is made by piling wood round a pole
which is surmounted by a nosegay or crown.<note place='foot'>Sébillot, Coutumes populaires de la
Haute Bretagne, p. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> ii. 392 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
Sometimes, instead of rolling fiery wheels, discs of
wood are ignited in the midsummer fires and thrown
into the air in the manner already described.<note place='foot'>Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, etc. des Tiroler
Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 159, No. 1354; Panzer,
<hi rend='italic'>Beitrag</hi>, i. 210; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 511.</note> At
Edersleben, near Sangerhausen, a high pole was planted
in the ground and a tar barrel was hung from it by a
chain which reached to the ground. The barrel was
then set on fire and swung round the pole amid shouts
of joy.<note place='foot'>Kuhn u. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>, p.
390; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> 511.</note>
</p>

<p>
In our own country the custom of lighting bonfires
at midsummer has prevailed extensively. In the
North of England these fires used to be lit in the open
streets. Young and old gathered round them; the
former leaped over the fires and engaged in games,
while the old people looked on. Sometimes the fires
were kindled on the tops of high hills. The people also
carried firebrands about the fields.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i. 300
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 318, cp. pp. 305, 306, 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 512.</note> In Herefordshire
and Somersetshire people used to make fires in the
fields on Midsummer Eve <q>to bless the apples.</q><note place='foot'>Aubrey, <hi rend='italic'>Remaines of Gentilisme
and Judaisme</hi>, p. 96, cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> p. 26.</note> In
Devonshire the custom of leaping over the midsummer
fires was also observed.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 311.</note> In Cornwall
bonfires were lit on Midsummer Eve and the people
marched round them with lighted torches, which they
also carried from village to village. On Whiteborough,
a large tumulus near Launceston, a huge bonfire
used to be kindled on Midsummer Eve; a tall summer
pole with a large bush at the top was fixed in the
centre of the bonfire.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> i. 303, 318, 319; Dyer,
<hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi>, p. 315.</note> At Darowen in Wales small
bonfires were lit on Midsummer Eve.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 318.</note> On the same
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
day people in the Isle of Man used to light fires to the
windward of every field, so that the smoke might pass
over the corn; and they folded their cattle and carried
blazing furze or gorse round them several times.<note place='foot'>J. Train, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Isle of
Man</hi>, ii. 120.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Ireland, <q>on the Eves of St. John Baptist
and St. Peter, they always have in every town a
bonfire late in the evening, and carry about bundles
of reeds fast tied and fired; these being dry, will
last long, and flame better than a torch, and be a
pleasing divertive prospect to the distant beholder;
a stranger would go near to imagine the whole country
was on fire.</q><note place='foot'>Brand, i. 303, quoting Sir Henry
Piers's <hi rend='italic'>Description of Westmeath</hi>.</note> Another writer says of the South of
Ireland: <q>On Midsummer's Eve, every eminence,
near which is a habitation, blazes with bonfires; and
round these they carry numerous torches, shouting and
dancing.</q><note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, quoting the author of
the <hi rend='italic'>Survey of the South of Ireland</hi>.</note> An author who described Ireland in the
first quarter of last century says: <q>On the vigil of St.
John the Baptist's nativity, they make bonfires, and
run along the streets and fields with wisps of straw
blazing on long poles to purify the air, which they
think infectious by believing all the devils, spirits,
ghosts, and hobgoblins fly abroad this night to hurt
mankind.</q><note place='foot'>Brand, i. 305, quoting the author
of the <hi rend='italic'>Comical Pilgrim's Pilgrimage
into Ireland</hi>.</note> Another writer states that he witnessed
the festival in Ireland in 1782: <q>Exactly at midnight
the fires began to appear, and taking advantage of
going up to the leads of the house, which had a widely
extended view, I saw on a radius of thirty miles, all
around, the fires burning on every eminence which the
country afforded. I had a further satisfaction in learning,
from undoubted authority, that the people <emph>danced
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
round the fires</emph>, and at the close went through these
fires, and made their sons and daughters, together with
their cattle, pass through the fire; and the whole was
conducted with religious solemnity.</q><note place='foot'>Brand, i. 304, quoting <hi rend='italic'>The Gentleman's
Magazine</hi>, February 1795, p.
124.</note> That the custom
prevailed in full force as late as 1867 appears from a
notice in the <hi rend='italic'>Liverpool Mercury</hi>, 29th June 1867, which
runs thus: <q>The old pagan fire-worship still survives
in Ireland, though nominally in honour of St. John.
On Sunday night bonfires were observed throughout
nearly every county in the province of Leinster. In
Kilkenny fires blazed on every hillside at intervals of
about a mile. There were very many in the Queen's
county, also in Kildare and Wexford. The effect in
the rich sunset appeared to travellers very grand.
The people assemble and dance round the fires, the
children jump through the flames, and in former times
live coals were carried into the corn-fields to prevent
blight.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular
Customs</hi>, p. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Scotland the traces of midsummer fires are
few. In reference to the parish of Mongahitter it is
said: <q>The Midsummer Eve fire, a relic of Druidism,
was kindled in some parts of this country.</q><note place='foot'>Brand, i. 311, quoting <hi rend='italic'>Statistical
Account of Scotland</hi>, xxi. 145.</note> Moresin
states that on St. Peter's Day (29th June) the Scotch
ran about with lighted torches on mountains and high
grounds;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 512.</note> and at Loudon in Ayrshire it appears that
down to the close of last century the custom still prevailed
for herdsmen and young people to kindle fires
on high grounds on St. Peter's Day.<note place='foot'>Brand, i. 337.</note> In the Perthshire
Highlands on Midsummer Day the cowherd used
to go three times round the fold, according to the
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
course of the sun, with a burning torch in his hand.
This was believed to purify the flocks and herds and
prevent diseases.<note place='foot'>J. Ramsay and A. Allardyce, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland
and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth
Century</hi>, ii. 436.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Slavonic countries also the midsummer festival
is celebrated with similar rites. In Russia fires are
lighted and young people, crowned with flowers, jump
through them and drive their cattle through them. In
Little Russia a stake is driven into the ground on St.
John's Night, wrapt in straw, and set on fire. As the
flames rise the peasant women throw birch-tree boughs
into them, saying, <q>May my flax be as tall as this
bough!</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 240; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 519.</note> <q>In Ruthenia the bonfires are lighted by
a flame procured from wood by friction, the operation
being performed by the elders of the party, amid the
respectful silence of the rest. But as soon as the fire
is <q>churned,</q> the bystanders break forth with joyous
songs, and when the bonfires are lit the young people
take hands, and spring in couples through the smoke,
if not through the flames, and after that the cattle in
their turn are driven through it.</q><note place='foot'>Ralston. <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In many parts of
Prussia and Lithuania great fires are kindled on the
Eve of St. John (Midsummer Eve). All the heights
are ablaze with them, as far as the eye can see. The
fires are supposed to be a protection against thunder,
hail, and cattle disease, especially if next morning the
cattle are driven over the places where the fires
burned.<note place='foot'>Tettau und Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volkssagen
Ostpreussens, Litthauens und
Westpreussens</hi>, p. 277; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
i. 519.</note> In some parts of Masuren it is the custom
on the evening of Midsummer Day to put out all the
fires in the village. Then an oaken stake is driven
into the ground, a wheel is fixed on it as on an axle
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
and is made to revolve rapidly, till the friction produces
fire. Every one takes home a light from the new
fire and rekindles the fire on the domestic hearth.<note place='foot'>Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben aus Masuren</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 71.</note>
In Bohemia the cows used to be driven over the
midsummer fires to protect them from witchcraft.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 307
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note>
In Servia on Midsummer Eve herdsmen light torches
of birch bark and march round the sheepfolds and
cattle-stalls; then they climb the hills and there allow
the torches to burn out.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Greece the women light fires on St. John's Eve
and jump over them crying, <q>I leave my sins behind
me.</q><note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Italy must also have had its midsummer bonfires,
since at Orvieto they were specially excepted
from the prohibition directed against bonfires in
general.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 518.</note> We have seen that they are still lighted in
Sardinia.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 291.</note> In Corsica on the Eve of St. John the
people set fire to the trunk of a tree or to a whole
tree, and the young men and maidens dance round the
blaze, which is called <foreign rend='italic'>fucaraja</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie des Plantes</hi>,
i. 185.</note> Midsummer fires
are, or were formerly, lighted in Spain.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i. 317;
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Even the
Mohammedans of Algeria and Morocco are reported
to have kindled great midsummer bonfires of straw,
into which they kept throwing incense and spices
the whole night, invoking the divine blessing on their
fruit-trees.<note place='foot'>G. Ferraro, <hi rend='italic'>Superstizioni, usi e
proverbi Monferrini</hi>, p. 34 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referring
to Alvise da Cadamosto, <hi rend='italic'>Relazion dei
viaggi d'Africa</hi>, in Ramusio.</note>
</p>

<p>
It remains to show that the burning of effigies
of human beings in the midsummer fires was not
uncommon. At Rottenburg in Würtemberg, down
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
to the beginning of the present century, a ceremony
was observed on Midsummer Day which was called
<q>beheading the angel-man.</q> A stump was driven
into the ground, wrapt with straw, and fashioned into
the rude likeness of a human figure, with arms, head,
and face. This was the angel-man; round about him
wood was piled up. The boys, armed with swords,
assembled in crowds, covered the figure completely
over with flowers, and eagerly awaited the signal.
When the pile of wood was fired and the angel-man
burst into a blaze, the word was given and all the boys
fell upon him with their swords and hewed the burning
figure in pieces. Then they leaped backwards and
forwards over the fire.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. 100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 513
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts of the Tyrol a
straw-man is carted about the village on Midsummer
Day and then burned. He is called the <foreign rend='italic'>Lotter</foreign>, which
has been corrupted into Luther.<note place='foot'>Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten</hi>, etc., <hi rend='italic'>des Tiroler
Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 159, No. 1353, cp. No.
1355; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 513.</note> In French Flanders
down to 1789 a straw figure representing a man was
always burned in the midsummer bonfire, and the
figure of a woman was burned on St. Peter's Day, 29th
June.<note place='foot'>Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
ii. 392; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 513.</note> At Grätz on the 23d June the common people
used to make a puppet called the <foreign rend='italic'>Tatermann</foreign>, which
they dragged to the bleaching-ground, and pelted with
burning besoms till it took fire.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 513.</note> In some parts of
Russia a figure of Kupalo is burned or thrown into
a stream on St. John's Night.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 240.</note> The Russian custom
of carrying the straw effigy of Kupalo over the midsummer
bonfire has been already described.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The best general explanation of these European
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
fire-festivals seems to be the one given by Mannhardt,
namely, that they are sun-charms or magical ceremonies
intended to ensure a proper supply of sunshine for
men, animals, and plants. We have seen that savages
resort to charms for making sunshine,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and we need
not wonder that primitive man in Europe has done
the same. Indeed, considering the cold and cloudy
climate of Europe during a considerable part of the
year, it is natural that sun-charms should have played
a much more prominent part among the superstitious
practices of European peoples than among those of
savages who live nearer the equator. This view of
the festivals in question is supported by various considerations
drawn partly from the rites themselves,
partly from the influence which they are believed to
exert upon the weather and on vegetation. For
example, the custom of rolling a burning wheel down
a hillside, which is often observed on these occasions,
seems a very natural imitation of the sun's course in
the sky, and the imitation is especially appropriate
on Midsummer Day when the sun's annual declension
begins. Not less graphic is the imitation of his
apparent revolution by swinging a burning tar-barrel
round a pole.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</note> The custom of throwing blazing discs,
shaped like suns, into the air is probably also a piece
of imitative magic. In these, as in so many cases, the
magic force is supposed to take effect through mimicry
or sympathy; by imitating the desired result you
actually produce it; by counterfeiting the sun's progress
through the heavens you really help the luminary
to pursue his celestial journey with punctuality and
despatch. The name <q>fire of heaven,</q> by which the
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
midsummer fire is sometimes popularly known,<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. 57, 97; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 510;
cp. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag</hi>, ii. 240.</note> clearly
indicates a consciousness of the connection between
the earthly and the heavenly flame.
</p>

<p>
Again, the manner in which the fire appears to have
been originally kindled on these occasions favours the
view that it was intended to be a mock-sun. For, as
various scholars have seen,<note place='foot'>Cp. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 521; Wolf,
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii.
389; Ad. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Herabkunft des
Feuers</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 47; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 521.</note> it is highly probable that
originally at these festivals fire was universally obtained
by the friction of two pieces of wood. We have seen
that this is still the case in some places both at the
Easter and midsummer fires, and that it is expressly
stated to have been formerly the case at the Beltane
fires.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</note> But what makes it almost certain that this was
once the invariable mode of kindling the fire at these
periodic festivals is the analogy of the need-fires.
Need-fires are kindled, not at fixed periods, but on
occasions of special distress, particularly at the outbreak
of a murrain, and the cattle are driven through
the need-fire, just as they are sometimes driven through
the midsummer fires.<note place='foot'>On the need-fires, see Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi> i. 501 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 378 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 518 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Elton,
<hi rend='italic'>Origins of English History</hi>, p. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche
bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</hi>, p. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Now, the need-fire has always
been produced by the friction of wood and sometimes
by the revolution of a wheel; in Mull, for example, it
was made by turning an oaken wheel over nine oaken
spindles from east to west, that is, in the direction of
the sun. It is a plausible conjecture that the wheel
employed to produce the need-fire represents the sun;<note place='foot'>This is the view of Grimm, Wolf,
Kuhn, and Mannhardt.</note>
and if the spring and midsummer fires were originally
produced in the same way, it would be a confirmation
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
of the view that they were originally sun-charms. In
point of fact there is, as Kuhn has pointed out,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Herabkunft des Feuers</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 47.</note> some
evidence to show that the midsummer fire was
originally thus produced. For at Obermedlingen in
Swabia the <q>fire of heaven,</q> as it was called, was
made on St. Vitus's Day (15th June) by igniting a
cart-wheel, which, smeared with pitch and plaited with
straw, was fastened on a pole twelve feet high, the top
of the pole being inserted in the nave of the wheel.
This fire was made on the summit of the mountain,
and as the flame ascended, the people uttered a set
form of words, with eyes and arms directed heaven-ward.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag</hi>, ii. 240.</note>
Here the fact of a wheel being fixed on the
top of a pole and ignited makes it probable that
originally the fire was produced, as in the need-fire, by
the revolution of a wheel. The day on which the
ceremony takes place (15th June) is near midsummer;
and we have seen that in Masuren fire is (or was)
actually made on Midsummer Day by turning a wheel
rapidly about an oaken pole, though it is not said that
the new fire so produced is used to light a bonfire.
</p>

<p>
Once more, the influence which these bonfires are
supposed to exert on the weather and on vegetation,
goes to show that they are sun-charms, since the
effects ascribed to them are identical with those of
sunshine. Thus, in Sweden the warmth or cold of
the coming season is inferred from the direction in
which the flames of the bonfire are blown; if they
blow to the south, it will be warm, if to the north,
cold. No doubt at present the direction of the flames
is regarded merely as an augury of the weather, not as
a mode of influencing it. But we may be pretty sure
that this is one of the cases in which magic has
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
dwindled into divination. So in the Eifel Mountains,
when the smoke blows towards the corn-fields, this
is an omen that the harvest will be abundant. But
doubtless the older view was, not merely that the
smoke and flames prognosticated, but that they actually
produced an abundant harvest, the heat of the flames
acting like sunshine on the corn. Indeed, this older
view must still have been held by people in the Isle of
Man when they lit fires to windward of their fields in
order that the smoke might blow over them. Again,
the idea that the corn will grow well as far as the
blaze of the bonfire is visible, is certainly a remnant of
the belief in the quickening and fertilising power of
the bonfires. The same belief reappears in the notion
that embers taken from the bonfires and inserted in
the fields will promote the growth of the crops, and
again it plainly underlies the custom of mixing the ashes
of the bonfire with the seed-corn at sowing, or of scattering
the ashes by themselves over the field. The belief
that the flax will grow as high as the people leap over
the bonfire belongs clearly to the same class of ideas.
Once more, we saw that at Konz, on the banks of the
Moselle, if the blazing wheel which was trundled down
the hillside reached the river without being extinguished,
this was hailed as a proof that the vintage would be
abundant. So firmly was this belief held that the
successful performance of the ceremony entitled the
villagers to levy a tax upon the owners of the neighbouring
vineyards. Here the unextinguished wheel
meant an unclouded sun, and this in turn meant an
abundant vintage. So the waggon-load of white wine
which the villagers received from the vineyards round
about was in fact a payment for the sunshine which
they had procured for the grapes.
</p>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<p>
The interpretation of these fire-customs as charms
for making sunshine is confirmed by a parallel custom
observed by the Hindoos of Southern India at the
Pongol or Feast of Ingathering. The festival is celebrated
in the early part of January, when, according
to Hindoo astrologers, the sun enters the tropic of
Capricorn, and the chief event of the festival coincides
with the passage of the sun. For some days
previously the boys gather heaps of sticks, straw,
dead leaves, and everything that will burn. On the
morning of the first day of the festival the heaps
are fired. Every street and lane has its bonfire.
The young folk leap over the fire or pile on fresh
fuel. This fire is an offering to Sûrya, the sun-god,
or to Agni, the deity of fire; it <q>wakes him from his
sleep, calling on him again to gladden the earth with
his light and heat.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. E. Gover, <q>The Pongol
festival in Southern India,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, N.S. v. (1870)
p. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> To say that the fires awaken
the sun-god from his sleep is only a metaphorical
and perhaps modernised expression of the belief that
they actually help to rekindle the sun's light and heat.
</p>

<p>
The custom of leaping over the fire and driving
cattle through it may be intended, on the one hand,
to secure for man and beast a share of the vital
energy of the sun, and, on the other hand, to purify
them from all evil influences; for to the primitive
mind fire is the most powerful of all purificatory
agents. The latter idea is obviously uppermost in
the minds of Greek women when they leap over the
midsummer fire, saying, <q>I leave my sins behind
me.</q> So in Yucatan at a New Year's festival
the people used to light a huge bonfire and pass
through it, in the belief that this was a means of
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
ridding themselves of their troubles.<note place='foot'>Diego de Landa, <hi rend='italic'>Relation des
choses de Yucatan</hi> (Paris, 1864), p. 233.</note> The custom
of driving cattle through a fire is not confined to
Europe. At certain times the Hottentots make a
fire of chips, dry branches, and green twigs, so as to
raise a great smoke. Through this fire they drive
their sheep, dragging them through by force, if
necessary. If the sheep make their escape without
passing through the fire, it is reckoned a heavy
disgrace and a very bad omen. But if they pass
readily through or over the fire, the joy of the
Hottentots is indescribable.<note place='foot'>Kolben, <hi rend='italic'>Present State of the Cape
of Good Hope</hi>, i. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The procession or race with burning torches,
which so often forms a part of these fire-festivals,
appears to be simply a means of diffusing far and
wide the genial influence of the bonfire or of the sunshine
which it represents. Hence on these occasions
lighted torches are very frequently carried over the
fields, sometimes with the avowed intention of fertilising
them;<note place='foot'>P. 253. The torches of Demeter,
which figure so largely in her myth and
on the monuments, are perhaps to be
explained by this custom. To regard,
with Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 536), the
torches in the modern European customs
as imitations of lightning seems
unnecessary.</note> and with the same intention live coals
from the bonfire are sometimes placed in the field
<q>to prevent blight.</q> The custom of trundling a
burning wheel over the fields, which is practised for
the express purpose of fertilising them, embodies
the same idea in a still more graphic form; since
in this way the mock-sun itself, not merely its light
and heat represented by torches, is made actually to
pass over the ground which is to receive its quickening
and kindly influence. Again, the custom of
carrying lighted brands round the cattle is plainly
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
equivalent to driving the animals through the fire.
It is quite possible that in these customs the idea
of the quickening power of fire may be combined
with the conception of it as a purgative agent for the
expulsion or destruction of evil beings. It is certainly
sometimes interpreted in the latter way by
persons who practise the customs; and this purgative
use of fire comes out very prominently, as we have
seen, in the general expulsion of demons from towns
and villages. But in the present class of cases this
aspect of it is perhaps secondary, if indeed it is more
than a later misinterpretation of the custom.
</p>

<p>
It remains to ask, What is the meaning of burning
an effigy in these bonfires? The effigies so burned,
as was remarked above, can hardly be separated from
the effigies of Death which are burned or otherwise
destroyed in spring; and grounds have been already
given for regarding the so-called effigies of Death
as really representations of the tree-spirit or spirit of
vegetation. Are the other effigies, which are burned
in the spring and midsummer bonfires, susceptible of
the same explanation? It would seem so. For just
as the fragments of the so-called Death are stuck in
the fields to make the crops grow, so the charred
embers of the figure burned in the spring bonfires
are sometimes placed in the fields in the belief that
they will keep vermin from the crop. Again, the
rule that the last married bride must leap over the
fire in which the straw-man is burned on Shrove
Tuesday, is probably intended to make her fruitful.
But, as we have seen, the power of blessing women
with offspring is a special attribute of tree-spirits;<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
it is therefore a fair presumption that the burning
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
effigy over which the bride must leap is a representative
of the fertilising tree-spirit or spirit of
vegetation. This character of the effigy, as representative
of the spirit of vegetation, is almost unmistakable
when the effigy is composed of an unthreshed
sheaf of corn or is covered from head to foot with
flowers.<note place='foot'>Pp. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</note> Again, it is to be noted that instead of an
effigy living trees are sometimes burned both in the
spring and midsummer bonfires.<note place='foot'>Pp. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</note> Now, considering
the frequency with which the tree-spirit is represented
in human shape, it is hardly rash to suppose that
when sometimes a tree and sometimes an effigy is
burned in these fires, the effigy and the tree are
regarded as equivalent to each other, each being a
representative of the tree-spirit. This, again, is confirmed
by observing, first, that sometimes the effigy
which is to be burned is carried about simultaneously
with a May-tree, the former being carried by the boys,
the latter by the girls;<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and, second, that the effigy
is sometimes tied to a living tree and burned with
it.<note place='foot'>Pp. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>.</note> In these cases, we can scarcely doubt, the tree-spirit
is represented, as we have found it represented
before, in duplicate, both by the tree and by the
effigy. That the true character of the effigy as a
representative of the beneficent spirit of vegetation
should sometimes be forgotten, is natural. The custom
of burning a beneficent god is too foreign to
later modes of thought to escape misinterpretation.
Naturally enough the people who continued to burn his
image came in time to identify it as the effigy of persons,
whom, on various grounds, they considered objectionable,
such as Judas Iscariot, Luther, and a witch.
</p>

<p>
The general reasons for killing a god or his
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
representative have been examined in the preceding
chapter. But when the god happens to be a deity
of vegetation, there are special reasons why he should
die by fire. For light and heat are necessary to
vegetable growth; and, on the principle of sympathetic
magic, by subjecting the personal representative of
vegetation to their influence, you secure a supply of
these necessaries for trees and crops. In other words,
by burning the spirit of vegetation in a fire which
represents the sun, you make sure that, for a time
at least, vegetation shall have plenty of sun. It
may be objected that, if the intention is simply to
secure enough sunshine for vegetation, this end would
be better attained, on the principles of sympathetic
magic, by merely passing the representative of vegetation
through the fire instead of burning him. In
point of fact this is sometimes done. In Russia, as
we have seen, the straw figure of Kupalo is not
burned in the midsummer fire, but merely carried
backwards and forwards across it.<note place='foot'>Vol. i. p. 272.</note> But, for the reasons
already given, it is necessary that the god should
die; so next day Kupalo is stripped of her ornaments
and thrown into a stream. In this Russian custom,
therefore, the passage of the image through the fire is
a sun-charm pure and simple; the killing of the god
is a separate act, and the mode of killing him&mdash;by
drowning&mdash;is probably a rain-charm. But usually
people have not thought it necessary to draw this fine
distinction; for the various reasons already assigned,
it is advantageous, they think, to expose the god of
vegetation to a considerable degree of heat, and it is
also advantageous to kill him, and they combine these
advantages in a rough-and-ready way by burning him.
</p>

<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>

<p>
Finally, we have to ask, were human beings
formerly burned as representatives of the tree-spirit
or deity of vegetation? We have seen reasons for
believing that living persons have often acted as
representatives of the tree-spirit, and have suffered
death as such. There is no reason, therefore, why
they should not have been burned, if any special
advantages were likely to be attained by putting
them to death in that way. The consideration of
human suffering is not one which enters into the
calculations of primitive man. It would have been
surprising if it did, when we remember the record
of Christian Europe. Now, in the fire-festivals which
we are discussing, the pretence of burning people is
sometimes carried so far that it seems reasonable to
regard it as a mitigated survival of an older custom
of actually burning them. Thus in Aachen, as we
saw, the man clad in peas-straw acts so cleverly
that the children really believe he is being burned.
And at the Beltane fires the pretended victim was
seized, and a show made of throwing him into the
fire, and for some time afterwards people affected to
speak of him as dead. In the following customs
Mannhardt is probably right in recognising traces of
an old custom of burning a leaf-clad representative of
the spirit of vegetation. At Wolfeck, in Austria, on
Midsummer Day, a boy completely clad in green fir
branches goes from house to house, accompanied by a
noisy crew, collecting wood for the bonfire. As he
gets the wood he sings&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Forest trees I want,</q></l>
<l>No sour milk for me,</l>
<l>But beer and wine,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>So can the wood-man be jolly and gay.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 524.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<p>
In some parts of Bavaria, also, the boys who go
from house to house collecting fuel for the midsummer
bonfire envelop one of their number from head to
foot in green branches of firs, and lead him by a rope
through the whole village.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria</hi>, iii. 956; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 524.</note> At Moosheim, in
Würtemberg, the festival of St. John's Fire usually
lasted for fourteen days, ending on the second Sunday
after Midsummer Day. On this last day the bonfire
was left in charge of the children, while the older
people retired to a wood. Here they encased a
young fellow in leaves and twigs, who, thus disguised,
went to the fire, scattered it, and trod it out. All the
people present fled at the sight of him.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 146; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi>
p. 524 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
But it seems possible to go farther than this. Of
human sacrifices offered on these occasions the most
unequivocal traces, as we have seen, are those which,
about a hundred years ago, still lingered at the Beltane
fires in the Highlands of Scotland, that is, among a
Celtic people who, situated in a remote corner of
Europe, enjoying practical independence, and almost
completely isolated from foreign influence, had till
then conserved their old heathenism better than any
other people in the West of Europe. It is significant,
therefore, that human sacrifices by fire are known, on
unquestionable evidence, to have been systematically
practised by the Celts. The earliest description of
these sacrifices is by Julius Caesar. As conqueror of
the hitherto independent Celts of Gaul, Caesar had
ample opportunity of observing the national Celtic
religion and manners, while these were still fresh and
crisp from the native mint and had not yet been
fused in the melting-pot of Roman civilisation. With
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
his own notes Caesar appears to have incorporated the
observations of a Greek explorer, by name Posidonius,
who travelled in Gaul about fifty years before Caesar
carried the Roman arms to the English Channel.
The Greek geographer Strabo and the historian
Diodorus seem also to have derived their descriptions
of the Celtic sacrifices from the work of Posidonius,
but independently of each other and of Caesar, for each
of the three derivative accounts contains some details
which are not to be found in either of the others. By
combining them, therefore, we can restore the original
account of Posidonius with some certainty, and thus
obtain a picture of the sacrifices offered by the Celts of
Gaul at the close of the second century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi><note place='foot'>Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>Bell. Gall.</hi> vi. 15; Strabo,
iv. 4, 5, p. 198; Casaubon; Diodorus,
v. 32. See Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 525
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The
following seem to have been the main outlines of the
custom. Condemned criminals were reserved by the
Celts in order to be sacrificed to the gods at a great
festival which took place once in every five years.
The more there were of such victims, the greater was
believed to be the fertility of the land.<note place='foot'>Strabo, iv. 4, 4, p. 197, τὰς δὲ
φονικὰς δίκας μάλιστα τούτοις [i.e. the
Druids] ἐπετέτραπτο δικάζειν, ὅταν τε
φορὰ τούτων ἧ, φορὰν καὶ τῆς χώρας
νομίζουσιν ὐπάρχειν. On this passage
see Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 529 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> When there
were not enough criminals to furnish victims, captives
taken in war were sacrificed to supply the deficiency.
When the time came the victims were sacrificed by the
Druids or priests. Some were shot down with arrows,
some were impaled, and some were burned alive in the
following manner. Colossal images of wicker-work or
of wood and grass were constructed; these were filled
with live men, cattle, and animals of other kinds; fire
was then applied to the images, and they were burned
with their living contents.
</p>

<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>

<p>
Such were the great festivals held once every five
years. But besides these quinquennial festivals, celebrated
on so grand a scale and with, apparently, so
large an expenditure of human life, it seems reasonable
to suppose that festivals of the same sort, only on a
lesser scale, were held annually, and that from these
annual festivals are lineally descended some at least
of the fire-festivals which, with their traces of human
sacrifices, are still celebrated year by year in many
parts of Europe. The gigantic images constructed of
osiers or covered with grass in which the Druids enclosed
their victims remind us of the leafy framework
in which the human representative of the tree-spirit is
still so often encased.<note place='foot'>See vol. i. p. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Considering, therefore, that
the fertility of the land was apparently supposed to
depend upon the due performance of these sacrifices,
Mannhardt is probably right in viewing the Celtic
victims, cased in osiers and grass, as representatives
of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation. These
wicker giants of the Druids seem to have still their
representatives at the spring and midsummer festivals
of modern Europe. At Douay a procession takes
place annually on the Sunday nearest to the 7th of
July. The great feature of the procession is a colossal
figure made of osiers, and called <q>the giant,</q> which is
moved through the streets by means of rollers and
ropes worked by men who are enclosed within the
figure. The wooden head of the giant is said to have
been carved and painted by Rubens. The figure is
armed as a knight with lance and sword, helmet and
shield. Behind him march his wife and his three children,
all constructed of osiers on the same principle,
but on a smaller scale.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 523, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> At Dunkirk the giant is forty
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
to fifty feet high, being made of basket-work and
canvas, properly painted and dressed. It contains a
great many living men within it, who move it about.
Wicker giants of this sort are common in the towns of
Belgium and French Flanders; they are led about at
the Carnival in spring. The people, it is said, are much
attached to these grotesque figures, speak of them with
patriotic enthusiasm, and never weary of gazing at
them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 523, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>; John Milner,
<hi rend='italic'>The History, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and
Survey of the Antiquities of Winchester</hi>,
i. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i.
325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; James Logan, <hi rend='italic'>The Scottish Gael</hi>,
ii. 358 (new ed.); Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Calendrier Belge</hi>, p. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In England artificial giants seem to have
been a standing feature of the midsummer festival. A
writer of the sixteenth century speaks of <q>Midsommer
pageants in London, where, to make the people wonder,
are set forth great and uglie gyants, marching as if
they were alive, and armed at all points, but within
they are stuffed full of browne paper and tow, which
the shrewd boyes, underpeeping, do guilefully discover,
and turne to a greate derision.</q><note place='foot'>Puttenham, <hi rend='italic'>Arte of English Poesie</hi>,
1589, p. 128, quoted by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular
Antiquities</hi>, i. 323.</note> The Mayor of
Chester in 1599 <q>altered many antient customs, as the
shooting for the sheriff's breakfast; the going of the
Giants at Midsommer, etc.</q><note place='foot'>King's <hi rend='italic'>Vale Royal of England</hi>, p.
208, quoted by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In these cases the giants
only figure in the processions. But sometimes they
are burned in the spring or summer bonfires. Thus
the people of the Rue aux Ours in Paris used annually
to make a great wicker-work figure, dressed as a soldier,
which they promenaded up and down the streets for
several days, and solemnly burned on the 3d of July,
the crowd of spectators singing <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Salve Regina</foreign>. The
burning fragments of the image were scattered among
the people, who eagerly scrambled for them. The
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
custom was abolished in 1743.<note place='foot'>Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Gervasius von Tilbury</hi>,
p. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 514.</note> In Brie, Isle de
France, a wicker-work giant, eighteen feet high, was
annually burned on Midsummer Eve.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> pp. 514, 523.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the Druidical custom of burning live animals,
enclosed in wicker-work, has its counterpart at the
spring and midsummer festivals. At Luchon in the
Pyrenees on Midsummer Eve <q>a hollow column, composed
of strong wicker-work, is raised to the height of
about sixty feet in the centre of the principal suburb,
and interlaced with green foliage up to the very top;
while the most beautiful flowers and shrubs procurable
are artistically arranged in groups below, so as to form
a sort of background to the scene. The column is
then filled with combustible materials, ready for ignition.
At an appointed hour&mdash;about 8 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>&mdash;a grand
procession, composed of the clergy, followed by young
men and maidens in holiday attire, pour forth from the
town chanting hymns, and take up their position around
the column. Meanwhile, bonfires are lit, with beautiful
effect, in the surrounding hills. As many living serpents
as could be collected are now thrown into the
column, which is set on fire at the base by means of
torches, armed with which about fifty boys and men
dance around with frantic gestures. The serpents, to
avoid the flames, wriggle their way to the top, whence
they are seen lashing out laterally until finally obliged
to drop, their struggles for life giving rise to enthusiastic
delight among the surrounding spectators. This
is a favourite annual ceremony for the inhabitants of
Luchon and its neighbourhood, and local tradition
assigns to it a heathen origin.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, 24th July 1869, p.
115; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 515 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the midsummer
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
fires formerly kindled on the Place de Grève at Paris
it was the custom to burn a basket, barrel, or sack full
of live cats; sometimes a fox was burned. The people
collected the embers and ashes of the fire and took
them home, believing that they brought good luck.<note place='foot'>Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
ii. 388; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 515.</note>
At Metz midsummer fires were lighted on the Esplanade,
and six cats were burned in them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 515.</note> In Russia a
white cock was sometimes burned in the midsummer
bonfire;<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i.
519; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 515.</note> in Meissen or Thüringen a horse's head used
to be thrown into it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 515.</note> Sometimes animals are burned
in the spring bonfires. In the Vosges cats were burned
on Shrove Tuesday; in Elsass they were thrown into
the Easter bonfire.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> We have seen that squirrels were
sometimes burned in the Easter fire.
</p>

<p>
If the men who were burned in wicker frames by
the Druids represented the spirit of vegetation, the
animals burned along with them must have had the
same meaning. Amongst the animals burned by the
Druids or in modern bonfires have been, as we saw,
cattle, cats, foxes, and cocks; and all of these creatures
are variously regarded by European peoples as embodiments
of the corn-spirit.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 408, vol. ii. p. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> I am not aware of any certain
evidence that in Europe serpents have been regarded
as representatives of the tree-spirit or corn-spirit;<note place='foot'>Some of the serpents worshipped
by the old Prussians lived in hollow
oaks, and as oaks were sacred among
the Prussians, the serpents may have
been regarded as genii of the trees.
Simon Grunau, <hi rend='italic'>Preussische Chronik</hi>,
ed. Perlbach, i. p. 89; Hartknoch, <hi rend='italic'>Altund
Neues Preussen</hi>, pp. 143, 163.
Serpents, again, played an important
part in the worship of Demeter, as we
have seen. But that they were regarded
as embodiments of her can hardly be
assumed. In Siam the spirit of the
<foreign rend='italic'>takhien</foreign> tree is believed to appear,
sometimes in the form of a woman,
sometimes in the form of a serpent.
Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volker des östlichen Asien</hi>,
iii. 251.</note> as
victims at the midsummer festival in Luchon they may
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
have replaced animals which really had this representative
character. When the meaning of the custom was
forgotten, utility and humanity might unite in suggesting
the substitution of noxious reptiles as victims in
room of harmless and useful animals.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that the sacrificial rites of the Celts
of ancient Gaul can be traced in the popular festivals
of modern Europe. Naturally it is in France, or rather
in the wider area comprised within the limits of ancient
Gaul, that these rites have left the clearest traces
in the customs of burning giants of wicker-work
and animals enclosed in wicker-work or baskets.
These customs, it will have been remarked, are generally
observed at or about midsummer. From this we
may infer that the original rites of which these are the
degenerate successors were solemnised at midsummer.
This inference harmonises with the conclusion suggested
by a general survey of European folk-custom,
that the midsummer festival must on the whole have
been the most widely diffused and the most solemn of
all the yearly festivals celebrated by the primitive
Aryans in Europe. And in its application to the Celts
this general conclusion is corroborated by the more or
less perfect vestiges of midsummer fire-festivals which
we have found lingering in all those westernmost promontories
and islands which are the last strongholds
of the Celtic race in Europe&mdash;Britanny, Cornwall,
Wales, the Isle of Man, Scotland, and Ireland. In
Scotland, it is true, the chief Celtic fire-festivals
certainly appear to have been held at Beltane (1st
May) and Hallow E'en; but this was exceptional.
</p>

<p>
To sum up: the combined evidence of ancient
writers and of modern folk-custom points to the conclusion
that amongst the Celts of Gaul an annual
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
festival was celebrated at midsummer, at which living
men, representing the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation,
were enclosed in wicker-frames and burned.
The whole rite was designed as a charm to make the
sun to shine and the crops to grow.
</p>

<p>
But another great feature of the Celtic midsummer
festival appears to have been the gathering of the
sacred mistletoe by the Druids. The ceremony has
been thus described by Pliny in a passage which has
often been quoted. After enumerating the different
kinds of mistletoe he proceeds: <q>In treating of this
subject, the admiration in which the mistletoe is held
throughout Gaul ought not to pass unnoticed. The
Druids, for so they call their wizards, esteem nothing
more sacred than the mistletoe and the tree on which
it grows, provided only that the tree is an oak. But
apart from this they choose oak-woods for their sacred
groves and perform no sacred rites without oak-leaves;
so that the very name of Druids may be regarded as a
Greek appellation derived from their worship of the
oak.<note place='foot'>Pliny derives the name Druid
the Greek <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>drūs</foreign>, <q>oak.</q> He did not
know that the Celtic word for oak was
the same (<foreign rend='italic'>daur</foreign>), and that therefore
Druid, in the sense of priest of the
oak, was genuine Celtic, not borrowed
from the Greek. See Curtius, <hi rend='italic'>Griech.
Etymologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> p. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Vaniček,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechisch-lateinisches etymolog. Wörterbuch</hi>,
p. 368 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Rhys, <hi rend='italic'>Celtic
Heathendom</hi>, p. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In the Highlands
of Scotland the word is found
in place-names like Bendarroch (the
mountain of the oak), Craigandarroch,
etc.</note> For they believe that whatever grows on these
trees is sent from heaven, and is a sign that the tree
has been chosen by the god himself. The mistletoe is
very rarely to be met with; but when it is found,
they gather it with solemn ceremony. This they do
especially in the sixth month (the beginnings of their
months and years are determined by the moon) and
after the tree has passed the thirtieth year of its age,
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
because by that time it has plenty of vigour, though it
has not attained half its full size. After due preparations
have been made for a sacrifice and a feast under
the tree, they hail it as the universal healer and bring
to the spot two white bulls, whose horns have never
been bound before. A priest clad in a white robe
climbs the tree and with a golden<note place='foot'>It is still a folk-lore rule not to cut
the mistletoe with iron; some say it
should be cut with gold. Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 1001. On the
objection to the use of iron in such cases,
see Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Gervasius von Tilbury</hi>,
p. 103; and above, vol. i. p. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> sickle cuts the
mistletoe, which is caught in a white cloth. Then
they sacrifice the victims, praying that God may make
his own gift to prosper with those upon whom he has
bestowed it. They believe that a potion prepared
from mistletoe will make barren animals to bring forth,
and that the plant is a remedy against all poison.</q><note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. § 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
On the Celtic worship of the oak, see also
Maximus Tyrius, <hi rend='italic'>Dissert.</hi> viii. 8, Κελτοὶ
σέβουσι μὲν Δία ἄγαλμα δὲ Διὸς Κελτικὸν
ὐψηλὴ δρῦς. With this mode of gathering
the mistletoe compare the following.
In Cambodia when a man perceives a
certain parasitic plant growing on a
tamarind-tree, he dresses in white and
taking a new earthen pot climbs the
tree at mid-day. He puts the plant in
the pot and lets the whole fall to the
ground. Then in the pot he makes a
decoction which renders invulnerable.
Aymonier, <q>Notes sur les coutumes et
croyances superstitieuses des Cambodgiens,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine Française, Excursions
et Reconnaissances</hi>, No. 16, p.
136.</note>
</p>

<p>
In saying that the Druids cut the mistletoe in the
sixth month Pliny must have had in his mind the
Roman calendar, in which the sixth month was June.
Now, if the cutting of the mistletoe took place in June,
we may be almost certain that the day which witnessed
the ceremony was Midsummer Eve. For in many
places Midsummer Eve, a day redolent of a thousand
decaying fancies of yore, is still the time for culling
certain magic plants, whose evanescent virtue can be
secured at this mystic season alone. For example, on
Midsummer Eve the fern is believed to burst into a
wondrous bloom, like fire or burnished gold. Whoever
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
catches this bloom, which very quickly fades and
falls off, can make himself invisible, can understand
the language of animals, and so forth. But he must not
touch it with his hand; he must spread a white cloth
under the fern, and the magic bloom (or seed) will fall
into it.<note place='foot'>Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
§ 123; Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
und Gebräuche aus Böhmen
und Mähren</hi>, §§ 673-677; Gubernatis,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologie des Plantes</hi>, ii. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Friend, <hi rend='italic'>Flowers and Flower Lore</hi>, p.
362; Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i.
314 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Vonbun, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi>, p. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Burne and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi>,
p. 242. Cp. <hi rend='italic'>Archaeological Review</hi>,
i. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, St. John's wort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypericum perforatum</foreign>),
a herb which is believed to heal all kinds of
wounds and to drive away witches and demons, is
gathered on Midsummer Eve (Eve of St. John), and
is worn as an amulet or hung over doors and windows
on that day.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i. 307,
312; Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of Plants</hi>, pp. 62,
286; Friend, <hi rend='italic'>Flowers and Flower Lore</hi>,
pp. 147, 149, 150, 540; Wuttke,
§ 134.</note> Again, mugwort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artemisia vulgaris</foreign>) is
believed to possess magic qualities provided it be
gathered on St. John's Eve. Hence in France it is
called the herb of St. John. People weave themselves
a girdle of the plant, believing that it will protect them
against ghosts, magic, misfortune, and disease, throughout
the year. Or they weave garlands of it on St.
John's Eve, and look through them at the midsummer
bonfire or put them on their heads. Whoever does
this will suffer no aches in his eyes or head that year.
Sometimes the plant is thrown into the midsummer
bonfire.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 514 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii.
1013 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iii. 356; Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> § 635-637; Friend, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 75;
Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. des Plantes</hi>, i. 189
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The superstitious association of fern-seed,
St. John's wort, and mugwort with Midsummer Eve
is widely diffused over Europe. The following associations
seem to be more local. In England the orpine
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sedum telephium</foreign>) is popularly called Midsummer
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
Men, because it has been customary to gather it on
Midsummer Eve for the purpose of using it to ascertain
the fate of lovers;<note place='foot'>Aubrey, <hi rend='italic'>Remaines of Gentilisme
and Judaisme</hi>, p. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Pop.
Ant.</hi> i. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Friend, p. 136.</note> and in England sprigs of red
sage are sometimes gathered on Midsummer Eve for
the same purpose.<note place='foot'>Brand, i. 333.</note> In Bohemia poachers fancy they
can make themselves invulnerable by means of fir-cones
gathered before sunrise on St. John's Day.<note place='foot'>Grohmann, § 1426.</note>
Again, in Bohemia wild thyme gathered on Midsummer
Day is used to fumigate the trees on Christmas
Eve, in order that they may grow well.<note place='foot'>Grohmann, § 648.</note> In Germany
and Bohemia a plant called St. John's Flower or St.
John's Blood (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hieracium pilosella</foreign>) is gathered on Midsummer
Eve. It should be rooted up with a gold
coin. The plant is supposed to bring luck and to be
especially good for sick cattle.<note place='foot'>Grohmann, § 681; Wuttke, § 134;
Rochholz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und
Brauch</hi>, i. 9; Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie
des Plantes</hi>, i. 190.</note>
</p>

<p>
These facts by themselves would suffice to raise
a strong presumption that, if the Druids cut the
mistletoe in June, as we learn from Pliny that they
did, the day on which they cut it could have been no
other than Midsummer Eve or Midsummer Day.
This presumption is converted into practical certainty
when we find it to be still a rule of folk-lore
that the mistletoe should be cut on Midsummer
Eve.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> iii. 78, 353.</note> Further, the peasants of Piedmont and Lombardy
still go out on Midsummer morning to search
the oak-leaves for the <q>oil of St. John,</q> which
is supposed to heal all wounds made with cutting
instruments.<note place='foot'>Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie des Plantes</hi>,
ii. 73.</note> Originally no doubt the <q>oil of St.
John</q> was simply the mistletoe, or a decoction made
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
from it. For in Holstein the mistletoe, especially oak-mistletoe,
is still regarded as a panacea for green
wounds;<note place='foot'>Friend, <hi rend='italic'>Flowers and Flower Lore</hi>,
p. 378. Hunters believe that the
mistletoe heals all wounds and brings
luck in hunting. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Herabkunjt
des Feuers</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 206.</note> and if, as is alleged, <q>all-healer</q> is an
epithet of the mistletoe in the modern Celtic speech
of Britanny, Wales, Ireland, and Scotland,<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 1009.</note> this can be
nothing but a survival of the name by which, as we
have seen, the Druids addressed the oak, or rather,
perhaps, the mistletoe.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that the two main features of the
Balder myth&mdash;the pulling of the mistletoe and the
burning of the god&mdash;were reproduced in the great
midsummer festival of the Celts. But in Scandinavia
itself, the home of Balder, both these features of his
myth can still be traced in the popular celebration of
midsummer. For in Sweden on Midsummer Eve
mistletoe is <q>diligently sought after, they believing it
to be, in a high degree, possessed of mystic qualities;
and that if a sprig of it be attached to the ceiling of
the dwelling-house, the horse's stall, or the cow's crib,
the <q>Troll</q> will then be powerless to injure either
man or beast.</q><note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>,
p. 269.</note> And in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark
huge bonfires are kindled on hills and eminences
on Midsummer Eve.<note place='foot'>Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 259; Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 517 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It does not appear, indeed,
that any effigy is burned in these bonfires; but the
burning of an effigy is a feature which might easily
drop out after its meaning was forgotten. And the
name of Balder's bale-fires (<foreign rend='italic'>Balder's Bălar</foreign>), by which
these midsummer fires were formerly known in
Sweden,<note place='foot'>Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> puts their connection with Balder beyond
the reach of doubt, and makes it certain that in
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
former times either a living representative or an effigy
of Balder must have been annually burned in them.
Midsummer was the season sacred to Balder, and the
fact that the Swedish poet Tegner, in his <hi rend='italic'>Frithiofssaga</hi>,
places the burning of Balder at midsummer<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> iii. 78, who adds,
<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Mahnen die Johannisfeuer an Baldrs
Leichenbrand?</foreign></q> This pregnant hint,
which contains in germ the solution of
the whole myth, has been quite lost on
the mythologists who since Grimm's
day have enveloped the subject in a
cloud of learned dust.</note> may perhaps
be allowed as evidence of a Swedish tradition to
that effect. From this double coincidence of the
Balder myth, on the one hand with the midsummer
festival of Celtic Gaul and on the other with the midsummer
festival in Scandinavia, we may safely conclude
that the myth is not a myth pure and simple,
that is, a mere description of physical phenomena in
imagery borrowed from human life; it must undoubtedly
be a ritualistic myth, that is a myth based
on actual observation of religious ceremonies and purporting
to explain them. Now, the standing explanation
which myth gives of ritual is that the ritual in
question is a periodic commemoration of some remarkable
transaction in the past, the actors in which may
have been either gods or men. Such an explanation
the Balder myth would seem to offer of the annual
fire-festivals which, as we saw, must have played so
prominent a part in the primitive religion of the Aryan
race in Europe. Balder must have been the Norse
representative of the being who was burnt in effigy or
in the person of a living man at the fire-festivals in
question. But if, as I have tried to show, the being
so burnt was the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation, it
follows that Balder also must have been a tree-spirit
or spirit of vegetation.
</p>

<p>
But it is desirable to determine, if we can, the
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
particular kind of tree or trees, of which a personal
representative was burned at the fire-festivals. For
we may be quite sure that it was not as a representative
of vegetation in general that the victim suffered
death. The conception of vegetation in general is too
abstract to be primitive. Most probably the victim at
first represented a particular kind of sacred tree. Now
of all European trees none has such claims as the oak
to be considered as pre-eminently the sacred tree of
the Aryans. Its worship is attested for all the great
branches of the Aryan stock in Europe. We have
seen that it was not only the sacred tree, but the
principal object of worship of both Celts and Slavs.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, and vol. i. pp. 58, 64.</note>
According to Grimm, the oak ranked first among the
holy trees of the Germans, and was indeed their chief
god. It is certainly known to have been adored by
them in the age of heathendom, and traces of its
worship have survived in various parts of Germany
almost to the present day.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
ii. 542, iii. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the ancient
Italians, according to Preller, the oak was sacred above
all other trees.<note place='foot'>Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Röm. Mythol.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 108.</note> The image of Jupiter on the Capitol
at Rome seems to have been originally nothing
but a natural oak-tree.<note place='foot'>Livy, i. 10. Cp. C. Bötticher,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</hi>, p.
133 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Dodona, perhaps the
oldest of all Greek sanctuaries, Zeus was worshipped
as immanent in the sacred oak, and the rustling of
its leaves in the wind was his voice.<note place='foot'>Bötticher, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griech. Mythol.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ed. C. Robert,
i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If, then, the
great god of both Greeks and Romans was represented
in some of his oldest shrines under the form
of an oak, and if the oak was the principal object
of worship of Celts, Germans, and Slavs, we may
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
certainly conclude that this tree was one of the chief,
if not the very chief divinity of the Aryans before
the dispersion; and that their primitive home must
have lain in a land which was clothed with forests
of oak.<note place='foot'>Without hazarding an opinion on
the vexed question of the primitive
home of the Aryans, I may observe
that in various parts of Europe the oak
seems to have been formerly more common
than it is now. In Denmark the
present beech woods were preceded by
oak woods and these by the Scotch fir.
Lyell, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquity of Man</hi>, p. 9; J.
Geikie, <hi rend='italic'>Prehistoric Europe</hi>, p. 486 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
In parts of North Germany it appears
from the evidence of archives that the
fir has ousted the oak. O. Schrader,
<hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Jena, 1890), p. 394. In prehistoric
times the oak appears to have been the
chief tree in the forests which clothed
the valley of the Po; the piles on which
the pile villages rested were of oak.
W. Helbig, <hi rend='italic'>Die Italiker in der Poebene</hi>,
p. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The classical tradition that
in the olden time men subsisted largely
on acorns is borne out by the evidence
of the pile villages in Northern Italy,
in which great quantities of acorns have
been discovered. See Helbig, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 26, 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Now, considering the primitive character and remarkable
similarity of the fire-festivals observed by all
the branches of the Aryan race in Europe, we may
infer that these festivals form part of the common
stock of religious observances which the various peoples
carried with them in their wanderings from their original
home. But, if I am right, an essential feature of
those primitive fire-festivals was the burning of a man
who represented the tree-spirit. In view, then, of
the place occupied by the oak in the religion of the
Aryans, the presumption is that the tree so represented
at the fire-festivals must originally have been the
oak. So far as the Celts and Slavs are concerned, this
conclusion will perhaps hardly be contested. But both
for them and for the Germans it is confirmed by a
remarkable piece of religious conservatism. The most
primitive method known to man of producing fire is
by rubbing two pieces of wood against each other till
they ignite; and we have seen that this method is still
used in Europe for kindling sacred fires such as the
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
need-fire, and that most probably it was formerly
resorted to at all the fire-festivals under discussion.
Now it is sometimes prescribed that the need-fire, or
other sacred fire, must be made by the friction of a
particular kind of wood; and wherever the kind of
wood is prescribed, whether among Celts, Germans, or
Slavs, that wood is always the oak. Thus we have seen
that amongst the Slavs of Masuren the new fire for the
village is made on Midsummer Day by causing a
wheel to revolve rapidly round an axle of oak till the
axle takes fire.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the perpetual fire which the
ancient Slavs used to maintain chanced to go out, it
was rekindled by the friction of a piece of oak-wood,
which had been previously heated by being struck
with a gray (not a red) stone.<note place='foot'>Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>, p. 19
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mr. Ralston states (on what
authority I do not know) that if the
fire maintained in honour of the Lithuanian
god Perkunas went out, it was
rekindled by sparks struck from a stone
which the image of the god held in his
hand. <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>,
p. 88.</note> In Germany the need-fire
was regularly kindled by the friction of oak-wood;<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 502, 503;
Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Herabkunft des Feuers</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 43;
Pröhle, <hi rend='italic'>Harzbilder</hi>, p. 75; Bartsch,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus
Mecklenburg</hi>, ii. 150; Rochholz,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und Brauch</hi>, ii. 148.
The writer who styles himself Montanus
says (<hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste</hi>, etc.,
p. 127) that the need-fire was made by
the friction of oak and fir. Sometimes
it is said that the need-fire should be
made with nine different kinds of wood
(Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 503, 505; Wolf,
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii.
380; Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche</hi>,
p. 27); but the kinds of wood
are not specified.</note>
and in the Highlands of Scotland, both the Beltane and
the need-fires were lighted by similar means.<note place='foot'>John Ramsay, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen
in the Eighteenth Century</hi>, ii. 442;
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 506. See above, p.
<ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>.</note> Now, if
the sacred fire was regularly kindled by the friction of
oak-wood, we may infer that originally the fire was also
fed with the same material. In point of fact, the perpetual
fire which burned under the sacred oak at the
great Slavonian sanctuary of Romove was fed with
oak-wood;<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 58.</note> and that oak-wood was formerly the fuel
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
burned in the midsummer fires may perhaps be inferred
from the circumstance that in many mountain districts
of Germany peasants are still in the habit of making
up their cottage fire on Midsummer Day with a heavy
block of oak-wood. The block is so arranged that it
smoulders slowly and is not finally reduced to charcoal
till the expiry of a year. Then upon next Midsummer
Day the charred embers of the old log are removed
to make room for the new one, and are mixed with
the seed-corn or scattered about the garden. This is
believed to promote the growth of the crops and to
preserve them from blight and vermin.<note place='foot'>Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Volksfeste</hi>, etc., p. 127.</note> It may be
remembered that at the Boeotian festival of the
Daedala, the analogy of which to the spring and midsummer
festivals of modern Europe has been already
pointed out, the great feature was the felling and burning
of an oak.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 100.</note> The general conclusion is, that at
those periodic or occasional ceremonies, of which the
object was to cause the sun to shine, and the fruits of
the earth to grow, the ancient Aryans both kindled
and fed the fire with the sacred oak-wood.
</p>

<p>
But if at these solemn rites the fire was regularly
made of oak-wood, it follows that the man who was
burned in it as a personification of the tree-spirit could
have represented no tree but the oak. The sacred
oak was thus burned in duplicate; the wood of the
tree was consumed in the fire, and along with it was
consumed a living man as a personification of the oak-spirit.
The conclusion thus drawn for the European
Aryans in general is confirmed in its special application
to the Celts and Scandinavians by the relation in which,
amongst these peoples, the mistletoe stood to the burning
of the victim in the midsummer fire. We have
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
seen that among Celts and Scandinavians it has been
customary to gather the mistletoe at midsummer. But
so far as appears on the face of this custom, there is
nothing to connect it with the midsummer fires in
which human victims or effigies of them were burned.
Even if the fire, as seems probable, was originally
always made with oak-wood, why should it have been
necessary to pull the mistletoe? The last link between
the midsummer customs of gathering the mistletoe
and lighting the bonfires is supplied by Balder's
myth, which certainly cannot be disjoined from the
customs in question. The myth shows that a vital
connection must once have been believed to subsist
between the mistletoe and the human representative of
the oak who was burned in the fire. According to the
myth, Balder could be killed by nothing in heaven or
earth except the mistletoe; and so long as the mistletoe
remained on the oak, he was not only immortal, but
invulnerable. Now, as soon as we see that Balder
was the oak, the origin of the myth becomes plain.
The mistletoe was viewed as the seat of life of the oak,
and so long as it was uninjured nothing could kill or
even wound the oak. The conception of the mistletoe
as the seat of life of the oak would naturally be suggested
to primitive people by the observation that
while the oak is deciduous, the mistletoe which grows
on it is evergreen. In winter the sight of its fresh
foliage among the bare branches must have been hailed
by the worshippers of the tree as a sign that the divine
life which had ceased to animate the branches yet
survived in the mistletoe, as the heart of a sleeper
still beats when his body is motionless. Hence when
the god had to be killed&mdash;when the sacred tree had
to be burnt&mdash;it was necessary to begin by breaking off
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
the mistletoe. For so long as the mistletoe remained
intact, the oak (so people thought) was invulnerable;
all the blows of their knives and axes would glance
harmless from its surface. But once tear from the oak
its sacred heart&mdash;the mistletoe&mdash;and the tree nodded
to its fall. And when in later times the spirit of the
oak came to be represented by a living man, it was
logically necessary to suppose that, like the tree he
personated, he could neither be killed nor wounded
so long as the mistletoe remained uninjured. The
pulling of the mistletoe was thus at once the signal
and the cause of his death.
</p>

<p>
But since the idea of a being whose life is thus, in
a sense, outside itself, must be strange to many readers,
and has, indeed, not yet been recognised in its full
bearing on primitive superstition, it will be worth
while to devote a couple of sections to the subject.
The result will be to show that, in assuming this idea
as the explanation of the relation of Balder to the
mistletoe, I assume a principle which is deeply
engraved on the mind of primitive man.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The external soul in folk-tales.'/>
<head>§ 3.&mdash;The external soul in folk-tales.</head>

<p>
In a former chapter we saw that, in the opinion of
primitive people, the soul may temporarily absent itself
from the body without causing death. Such temporary
absences of the soul are often believed to involve considerable
risk, since the wandering soul is liable to a
variety of mishaps at the hands of enemies, and so
forth. But there is another aspect to this power of
externalising the soul. If only the safety of the soul
can be ensured during its absence from the body, there
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
is no reason why the soul should not continue absent
for an indefinite time; indeed a man may, on a pure
calculation of personal safety, desire that his soul should
never return to his body. Unable to conceive of life
abstractly as a <q>permanent possibility of sensation</q> or
a <q>continuous adjustment of internal arrangements to
external relations,</q> the savage thinks of it as a concrete
material thing of a definite bulk, capable of being seen
and handled, kept in a box or jar, and liable to be
bruised, fractured, or smashed in pieces. It is not
needful that the life, so conceived, should be in the
man; it may be absent from his body and still continue
to animate him, by virtue of a sort of sympathy
or <q>action at a distance.</q> So long as this object
which he calls his life or soul remains unharmed,
the man is well; if it is injured, he suffers; if it is
destroyed, he dies. Or, to put it otherwise, when a
man is ill or dies, the fact is explained by saying that
the material object called his life or soul, whether it be
in his body or out of it, has either sustained injury or
been destroyed. But there may be circumstances in
which, if the life or soul remains in the man, it stands
a greater chance of sustaining injury than if it were
stowed away in some safe and secret place. Accordingly,
in such circumstances, primitive man takes his
soul out of his body and deposits it for security in
some safe place, intending to replace it in his body
when the danger is past. Or if he should discover
some place of absolute security, he may be content to
leave his soul there permanently. The advantage of
this is that, so long as the soul remains unharmed in
the place where he has deposited it, the man himself
is immortal; nothing can kill his body, since his life is
not in it.
</p>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<p>
Evidence of this primitive belief is furnished by
a class of folk-tales of which the Norse story of
<q>The giant who had no heart in his body</q> is perhaps
the best-known example. Stories of this kind are
widely diffused over the world, and from their number
and the variety of incident and of details in which
the leading idea is embodied, we may infer that
the conception of an external soul is one which has
had a powerful hold on the minds of men at an early
stage of history. For folk-tales are a faithful reflection
of the world as it appeared to the primitive mind; and
we may be sure that any idea which commonly occurs
in them, however absurd it may seem to us, must once
have been an ordinary article of belief. This assurance,
so far as it concerns the supposed power of externalising
the soul for a longer or shorter time, is amply corroborated
by a comparison of the folk-tales in question
with the actual beliefs and practices of savages. To
this we shall return after some specimens of the tales
have been given. The specimens will be selected
with a view of illustrating both the characteristic
features and the wide diffusion of this class of tales.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, the story of the external soul is
told, in various forms, by all Aryan peoples from
Hindustan to the Hebrides. A very common form
of it is this: A warlock, giant, or other fairyland
being is invulnerable and immortal because he keeps
his soul hidden far away in some secret place; but a fair
princess, whom he holds enthralled in his enchanted
castle, wiles his secret from him and reveals it to the
hero, who seeks out the warlock's soul, heart, life, or
death (as it is variously called), and, by destroying it,
simultaneously kills the warlock. Thus a Hindoo
story tells how a magician called Punchkin held a
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
queen captive for twelve years, and would fain marry
her, but she would not have him. At last the queen's
son came to rescue her, and the two plotted together
to kill Punchkin. So the queen spoke the magician fair,
and pretended that she had at last made up her mind
to marry him. <q><q>And do tell me,</q> she said, <q>are you
quite immortal? Can death never touch you? And
are you too great an enchanter ever to feel human
suffering?</q> ... <q>It is true,</q> he said, <q>that I am not as
others. Far, far away&mdash;hundreds of thousands of
miles from this&mdash;there lies a desolate country covered
with thick jungle. In the midst of the jungle grows a
circle of palm-trees, and in the centre of the circle stand
six chattees full of water, piled one above another;
below the sixth chattee is a small cage, which contains
a little green parrot&mdash;on the life of the parrot depends
my life&mdash;and if the parrot is killed I must die. It is,
however,</q> he added, <q>impossible that the parrot should
sustain any injury, both on account of the inaccessibility
of the country, and because, by my appointment, many
thousand genii surround the palm-trees, and kill all
who approach the place.</q></q> But the queen's young
son overcame all difficulties, and got possession of
the parrot. He brought it to the door of the magician's
palace, and began playing with it. Punchkin,
the magician, saw him, and, coming out, tried to
persuade the boy to give him the parrot. <q><q>Give me
my parrot!</q> cried Punchkin. Then the boy took hold
of the parrot and tore off one of his wings; and as he
did so the magician's right arm fell off. Punchkin
then stretched out his left arm, crying, <q>Give me my
parrot!</q> The prince pulled off the parrot's second
wing, and the magician's left arm tumbled off. <q>Give
me my parrot!</q> cried he, and fell on his knees. The
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
prince pulled off the parrot's right leg, the magician's
right leg fell off; the prince pulled off the parrot's left
leg, down fell the magician's left. Nothing remained
of him except the lifeless body and the head; but still
he rolled his eyes, and cried, <q>Give me my parrot!</q>
<q>Take your parrot, then,</q> cried the boy; and with that
he wrung the bird's neck, and threw it at the magician;
and, as he did so, Punchkin's head twisted round, and,
with a fearful groan, he died!</q><note place='foot'>Mary Frere, <hi rend='italic'>Old Deccan Days</hi>, p.
12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another Hindoo
tale an ogre is asked by his daughter, <q><q>Papa, where
do you keep your soul?</q> <q>Sixteen miles away from
this place,</q> said he, <q>is a tree. Round the tree are
tigers, and bears, and scorpions, and snakes; on the
top of the tree is a very great fat snake; on his head
is a little cage; in the cage is a bird; and my soul is
in that bird.</q></q> The end of the ogre is like that of the
magician in the previous tale. As the bird's wings
and legs are torn off, the ogre's arms and legs drop
off; and when its neck is wrung he falls down dead.<note place='foot'>Maive Stokes, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Fairy Tales</hi>,
p. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> For similar stories, see <hi rend='italic'>id</hi>.
p. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales
of Bengal</hi>, p. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. A. Steel and
R. C. Temple, <hi rend='italic'>Wide-awake Stories</hi>, p.
58 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In another Hindoo story a princess called Sodewa
Bai is born with a golden necklace about her neck, and
the astrologer told her parents, <q>This is no common
child; the necklace of gold about her neck contains
your daughter's soul; let it, therefore, be guarded with
the utmost care; for if it were taken off and worn
by another person, she would die.</q> So her mother
caused it to be firmly fastened round the child's neck,
and, as soon as the child was old enough to understand,
she told her its value, and warned her never to
let it be taken off. In course of time Sodewa Bai was
married to a prince who had another wife living. The
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
first wife, jealous of her young rival, persuaded a
negress to steal from Sodewa Bai the golden necklace
which contained her soul. The negress did so, and,
as soon as she put the necklace round her own neck,
Sodewa Bai died. All day long the negress used to
wear the necklace; but late at night, on going to bed,
she would take it off and put it by till morning; and
whenever she took it off, Sodewa Bai's soul returned to
her and she lived. But when morning came, and the
negress put on the necklace, Sodewa Bai died again.
At last the prince discovered the treachery of his elder
wife and restored the golden necklace to Sodewa Bai.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old Deccan Days</hi>, p. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
In another Hindoo story a holy mendicant tells a
queen that she will bear a son, adding, <q>As enemies
will try to take away the life of your son, I may as
well tell you that the life of the boy will be bound up
in the life of a big <foreign rend='italic'>boal</foreign>-fish which is in your tank in
front of the palace. In the heart of the fish is a small
box of wood, in the box is a necklace of gold, that
necklace is the life of your son.</q> The boy was born
and received the name of Dalim. His mother was the
Suo or younger queen. But the Duo or elder queen
hated the child, and learning the secret of his life, she
caused the <foreign rend='italic'>boal</foreign>-fish, with which his life was bound up,
to be caught. Dalim was playing near the tank at the
time, but <q>the moment the <foreign rend='italic'>boal</foreign>-fish was caught in the
net, that moment Dalim felt unwell; and when the fish
was brought up to land, Dalim fell down on the ground,
and made as if he was about to breathe his last. He
was immediately taken into his mother's room, and the
king was astonished on hearing of the sudden illness
of his son and heir. The fish was by the order of the
physician taken into the room of the Duo queen, and
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
as it lay on the floor striking its fins on the ground,
Dalim in his mother's room was given up for lost.
When the fish was cut open, a casket was found in it;
and in the casket lay a necklace of gold. The moment
the necklace was worn by the queen, that very moment
Dalim died in his mother's room.</q> The queen used
to put off the necklace every night, and whenever
she did so, the boy came to life again. But every
morning when the queen put on the necklace, he died
again.<note place='foot'>Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
For similar stories of necklaces, see
<hi rend='italic'>Old Deccan Days</hi>, p. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Wide-awake
Stories</hi>, p. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In a Cashmeer story a lad visits an old ogress,
pretending to be her grandson, the son of her
daughter who had married a king. So the old ogress
took him into her confidence and showed him seven
cocks, a spinning-wheel, a pigeon, and a starling.
<q>These seven cocks,</q> said she, <q>contain the lives of
your seven uncles, who are away for a few days. Only
as long as the cocks live can your uncles hope to live;
no power can hurt them as long as the seven cocks are
safe and sound. The spinning-wheel contains my life;
if it is broken, I too shall be broken, and must die;
but otherwise I shall live on for ever. The pigeon
contains your grandfather's life, and the starling your
mother's; as long as these live, nothing can harm your
grandfather or your mother.</q> So the lad killed the
seven cocks and the pigeon and the starling, and
smashed the spinning-wheel; and at the moment he
did so the ogres and ogresses perished.<note place='foot'>J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of
Kashmir</hi> (London, 1888), p. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another
story from Cashmeer an ogre cannot die unless a
particular pillar in the verandah of his palace be
broken. Learning the secret, a prince struck the
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
pillar again and again till it was broken in pieces.
And it was as if each stroke had fallen on the ogre,
for he howled lamentably and shook like an aspen
every time the prince hit the pillar, until at last, when
the pillar fell down, the ogre also fell down and gave
up the ghost.<note place='foot'>J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of Kashmir</hi> (London, 1888), p. 134.</note> In another Cashmeer tale an ogre is
represented as laughing very heartily at the idea that
he might possibly die. He said that <q>he should never
die. No power could oppose him; no years could
age him; he should remain ever strong and ever
young, for the thing wherein his life dwelt was most
difficult to obtain.</q> It was in a queen bee, which was
in a honeycomb on a tree. But the bees in the
honeycomb were many and fierce, and it was only
at the greatest risk that any one could catch the
queen. But the hero achieved the enterprise and
crushed the queen bee; and immediately the ogre
fell stone dead to the ground, so that the whole land
trembled with the shock.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> p. 382 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In some Bengalee tales the
life of a whole tribe of ogres is described as concentrated
in two bees. The secret was thus revealed
by an old ogress to a captive princess who pretended
to fear lest the ogress should die. <q>Know, foolish
girl,</q> said the ogress, <q>that we ogres never die. We
are not naturally immortal, but our life depends on
a secret which no human being can unravel. Let me
tell you what it is that you may be comforted. You
know yonder tank; there is in the middle of it a
crystal pillar, on the top of which in deep water are
two bees. If any human being can dive into the water
and bring up the two bees from the pillar in one
breath, and destroy them so that not a drop of their
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
blood falls to the ground, then we ogres shall certainly
die; but if a single drop of blood falls to the ground,
then from it will start up a thousand ogres. But what
human being will find out this secret, or, finding it,
will be able to achieve the feat? You need not, therefore,
darling, be sad; I am practically immortal.</q>
As usual, the princess reveals the secret to the hero,
who kills the bees, and that same moment all the
ogres drop down dead, each on the spot where he
happened to be standing.<note place='foot'>Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> p. 253 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
i. (1872) 117. For an Indian story in
which a giant's life is in five black bees,
see Clouston, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales and
Fictions</hi>, i. 350.</note> In another Bengalee story
it is said that all the ogres dwell in Ceylon, and that
all their lives are in a single lemon. A boy cuts the
lemon in pieces, and all the ogres die.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, i. 171.</note>
</p>

<p>
In a Siamese or Cambodian story, probably derived
from India, we are told that Thossakan or
Ravana, the King of Ceylon, was able by magic
art to take his soul out of his body and leave it
in a box at home, while he went to the wars. Thus
he was invulnerable in battle. When he was about
to give battle to Rama, he deposited his soul with
a hermit called Fire-eye, who was to keep it safe for
him. So in the fight Rama was astounded to see that
his arrows struck the king without wounding him.
But one of Rama's allies, knowing the secret of
the king's invulnerability, transformed himself by
magic into the likeness of the king, and going to the
hermit asked back his soul. On receiving it he soared
up into the air and flew to Rama, brandishing the box
and squeezing it so hard that all the breath left the
King of Ceylon's body, and he died.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iv. 340 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a Bengalee
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
story a prince going into a far country planted with his
own hands a tree in the courtyard of his father's
palace, and said to his parents, <q>This tree is my life.
When you see the tree green and fresh, then know
that it is well with me; when you see the tree fade in
some parts, then know that I am in an ill case; and
when you see the whole tree fade, then know that I
am dead and gone.</q><note place='foot'>Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 189.</note> In another Indian tale a prince,
setting forth on his travels, left behind him a barley
plant with instructions that it should be carefully
tended and watched, for if it flourished, he would be
alive and well, but if it drooped, then some mischance
was about to happen to him. And so it fell out. For
the prince was beheaded, and as his head rolled off,
the barley plant snapped in two and the ear of barley
fell to the ground.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Wide-awake Stories</hi>, pp. 52, 64.</note> In the legend of the origin of
Gilgit there figures a fairy king whose soul is in the
snows and who can only perish by fire.<note place='foot'>G. W. Leitner, <hi rend='italic'>The Languages and
Races of Dardistan</hi>, p. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Greek tales, ancient and modern, the idea of
an external soul is not uncommon. When Meleager
was seven days old, the Fates appeared to his mother
and told her that Meleager would die when the brand
which was blazing on the hearth had burnt down. So
his mother snatched the brand from the fire and kept
it in a box. But in after years, being enraged at her
son for slaying her brothers, she burnt the brand in
the fire and Meleager at once expired.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, i. 8; Diodorus, iv.
34; Pausanias, x. 31, 4; Aeschylus,
<hi rend='italic'>Choeph.</hi> 604 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, Nisus
King of Megara, had a purple or golden hair on the
middle of his head, and it was fated that whenever
the hair was pulled out the king should die. When
Megara was besieged by the Cretans, the king's
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
daughter Scylla fell in love with Minos, their King,
and pulled out the fatal hair from her father's head.
So he died.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, iii. 15, 8; Aeschylus,
<hi rend='italic'>Choeph.</hi> 612 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Pausanias, i. 19,
4. According to Tzetzes (<hi rend='italic'>Schol. on
Lycophron</hi>, 650) not the life but the
strength of Nisus was in his golden
hair; when it was pulled out, he became
weak and was slain by Minos. According
to Hyginus (<hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 198) Nisus was
destined to reign only so long as he kept
the purple lock on his head.</note> Similarly Poseidon made Pterelaus
immortal by giving him a golden hair on his head.
But when Taphos, the home of Pterelaus, was besieged
by Amphitryon, the daughter of Pterelaus fell
in love with Amphitryon and killed her father by
plucking out the golden hair with which his life was
bound up.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, ii. 4, §§ 5, 7.</note> In a modern Greek folk-tale a man's
strength lies in three golden hairs on his head. When
his mother pulls them out, he grows weak and timid
and is slain by his enemies.<note place='foot'>Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische und Albanesische
Märchen</hi>, i. p. 217; a similar
story, <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> ii. p. 282.</note> In another modern
Greek story the life of an enchanter is bound up with
three doves which are in the belly of a wild boar.
When the first dove is killed, the magician grows sick,
when the second is killed, he grows very sick, and
when the third is killed, he dies.<note place='foot'>Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Greek
story of the same sort an ogre's strength is in three
singing birds which are in a wild boar. The hero
kills two of the birds, and then coming to the ogre's
house finds him lying on the ground in great pain.
He shows the third bird to the ogre, who begs that the
hero will either let it fly away or give it to him to eat.
But the hero wrings the bird's neck and the ogre dies
on the spot.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> ii. p. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Similar stories,
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> ii. pp. 204, 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In an Albanian
story a monster's strength is in three
pigeons, which are in a hare, which is
in the silver tusk of a wild boar. When
the boar is killed, the monster feels ill;
when the hare is cut open, he can hardly
stand on his feet; when the three pigeons
are killed, he expires. Dozon, <hi rend='italic'>Contes
albanais</hi>, p. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a variant of the latter story the
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
monster's strength is in two doves, and when the hero
kills one of them, the monster cries out, <q>Ah, woe is
me! Half my life is gone. Something must have
happened to one of the doves.</q> When the second dove
is killed, he dies.<note place='foot'>Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another Greek story the incidents
of the three golden hairs and the three doves are
artificially combined. A monster has three golden
hairs on his head which open the door of a chamber
in which are three doves; when the first dove is
killed, the monster grows sick, when the second is
killed, he grows worse, and when the third is killed,
he dies.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> i. p. 187.</note> In another Greek tale an old man's strength
is in a ten-headed serpent. When the serpent's heads
are being cut off, he feels unwell, and when the last
head is struck off, he expires.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi> ii. p. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Greek
story a dervish tells a queen that she will have three
sons, that at the birth of each she must plant a
pumpkin in the garden, and that in the fruit borne by
the pumpkins will reside the strength of the children.
In due time the infants are born and the pumpkins
planted. As the children grow up the pumpkins
grow with them. One morning the eldest son feels
sick, and on going into the garden they find that the
largest pumpkin is gone. Next night the second
son keeps watch in a summer-house in the garden. At
midnight a negro appears and cuts the second pumpkin.
At once the boy's strength goes out of him and
he is unable to pursue the negro. The youngest
son, however, succeeds in slaying the negro and
recovering the lost pumpkins.<note place='foot'>Legrand, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires grecs</hi>, p. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Ancient Italian legend furnishes a close parallel to
the Greek story of Meleager. Silvia, the young wife
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
of Septimius Marcellus, had a child by the god Mars.
The god gave her a spear, with which he said that
the fate of the child would be bound up. When the
boy grew up he quarrelled with his maternal uncles
and slew them. So in revenge his mother burned the
spear on which his life depended.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Parallela</hi>, 26. In both
the Greek and Italian stories the subject
of quarrel between nephew and
uncles is the skin of a boar, which
the nephew presented to his lady-love
and which his uncles took from her.</note> In one of the
stories of the <hi rend='italic'>Pentamerone</hi> a certain queen has a twin
brother, a dragon. The astrologers declared at her
birth that she would live just as long as the dragon
and no longer, the death of the one involving the
death of the other. If the dragon were killed, the
only way to restore the queen to life would be to
smear her temples, breast, pulses, and nostrils with
the blood of the dragon.<note place='foot'>Basile, <hi rend='italic'>Pentamerone</hi>, ii. p. 60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(Liebrecht's German trans.)</note> In a modern Roman
version of <q>Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp,</q> the
magician tells the princess whom he holds captive
in a floating rock in mid-ocean that he will never
die. The princess reports this to the prince her
husband, who has come to rescue her. The prince
replies, <q>It is impossible but that there should be
some one thing or other that is fatal to him; ask him
what that one fatal thing is.</q> So the princess asked
the magician and he told her that in the wood was a
hydra with seven heads; in the middle head of the
hydra was a leveret, in the head of the leveret was
a bird, in the bird's head was a precious stone, and
if this stone were put under his pillow he would die.
The prince procured the stone and the princess laid
it under the magician's pillow. No sooner did the
enchanter lay his head on the pillow than he gave
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
three terrible yells, turned himself round and round
three times, and died.<note place='foot'>R. H. Busk, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of Rome</hi>, p.
164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Stories of the same sort are current among
Slavonic peoples. Thus in a Russian tale a warlock
called Koshchei the Deathless is asked where his
death is. <q>My death,</q> he answered, <q>is in such and
such a place. There stands an oak, and under the
oak is a casket, and in the casket is a hare, and in the
hare is a duck, and in the duck is an egg, and in the
egg is my death.</q> A prince obtained the egg and
squeezed it, whereupon Koshchei the Deathless bent
double. But when the prince shivered the egg in
pieces, the warlock died.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Russian Folk-tales</hi>, p.
103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; so Dietrich, <hi rend='italic'>Russian Popular
Tales</hi>, p. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> <q>In one of the descriptions
of Koshchei's death, he is said to be killed by a blow
on the forehead inflicted by the mysterious egg&mdash;that
last link in the magic chain by which his life is darkly
bound. In another version of the same story, but told
of a snake, the fatal blow is struck by a small stone
found in the yolk of an egg, which is inside a duck,
which is inside a hare, which is inside a stone, which
is on an island.</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 109.</note> In another variant the prince
shifts the fatal egg from one hand to the other, and as
he does so Koshchei rushes wildly from side to side
of the room. At last the prince smashes the egg, and
Koshchei drops dead.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> In another Russian story the
death of an enchantress is in a blue rose-tree in a blue
forest. Prince Ivan uproots the rose-tree, whereupon
the enchantress straightway sickens. He brings the
rose-tree to her house and finds her at the point of
death. Then he throws it into the cellar, crying,
<q>Behold her death!</q> and at once the whole building
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
shakes, <q>and becomes an island, on which are people
who had been sitting in Hell, and who offer up thanks
to Prince Ivan.</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Russian Folk-tales</hi>, p.
113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Russian story a prince
is grievously tormented by a witch who has got hold
of his heart, and keeps it seething in a magic cauldron.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, p. 114.</note>
In a Bohemian tale a warlock's strength lies in an
egg, which is in a duck, which is in a stag, which is
under a tree. A seer finds the egg and sucks it.
Then the warlock grows as weak as a child, <q>for all
his strength had passed into the seer.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, p. 110.</note> In a Serbian
story a fabulous being called True Steel declares,
<q>Far away from this place there is a very high
mountain, in the mountain there is a fox, in the fox
there is a heart, in the heart there is a bird, and in
this bird is my strength.</q> The fox is caught and
killed and its heart is taken out. Out of the fox's
heart is taken the bird, which is then burnt, and that
very moment True Steel falls dead.<note place='foot'>Mijatovics, <hi rend='italic'>Serbian Folk-lore</hi>,
edited by the Rev. W. Denton, p. 172;
F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen und Märchen der
Südslaven</hi>, i. (No. 34) p. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a South
Slavonian story a dragon tells an old woman, <q>My
strength is a long way off, and you cannot go thither.
Far in another empire under the emperor's city is a
lake, in that lake is a dragon, and in the dragon a
boar, and in the boar a pigeon, and in that is my
strength.</q><note place='foot'>A. H. Wraitslaw, <hi rend='italic'>Sixty Folk-Tales
from exclusively Slavonic sources</hi>
(London, 1889), p. 225.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst peoples of the Teutonic stock stories of
the external soul are not wanting. In a tale told by
the Saxons of Transylvania it is said that a young
man shot at a witch again and again. The bullets
went clean through her but did her no harm, and she
only laughed and mocked at him. <q>Silly earthworm,</q>
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
she cried, <q>shoot as much as you like. It does me no
harm. For know that my life resides not in me but
far, far away. In a mountain is a pond, on the pond
swims a duck, in the duck is an egg, in the egg burns
a light, that light is my life. If you could put out that
light, my life would be at an end. But that can never,
never be.</q> However, the young man got hold of the
egg, smashed it, and put out the light, and with it the
witch's life went out also.<note place='foot'>Haltrich, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Volksmärchen
aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
No. 34 (No. 33 of the first ed.), p.
149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a German story a
cannibal called Soulless keeps his soul in a box, which
stands on a rock in the middle of the Red Sea. A
soldier gets possession of the box and goes with it to
Soulless, who begs the soldier to give him back his
soul. But the soldier opens the box, takes out the
soul, and flings it backward over his head. At the
same moment the cannibal drops down stone dead.<note place='foot'>J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Marchen und
Sagen</hi>, No. 20, p. 87 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
In an Oldenburg story a king has three sons and a
daughter, and for each child there grows a flower in
the king's garden. Each of the flowers is a life
flower; it blooms and flourishes while the child lives,
but when the child dies it withers away.<note place='foot'>Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und Sagen
aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>, ii.
p. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another
German story an old warlock lives with a damsel all
alone in the midst of a vast and gloomy wood. She
fears that being old he may die and leave her alone in
the forest. But he reassures her. <q>Dear child,</q> he
said, <q>I cannot die, and I have no heart in my breast.</q>
But she importuned him to tell her where his heart was.
So he said, <q>Far, far from here in an unknown and
lonesome land stands a great church. The church is
well secured with iron doors, and round about it flows
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
a broad deep moat. In the church flies a bird and in
the bird is my heart. So long as that bird lives, I live.
It cannot die of itself, and no one can catch it; therefore
I cannot die, and you need have no anxiety.</q>
However, the young man, whose bride the damsel was
to have been before the warlock spirited her away,
contrived to reach the church and catch the bird. He
brought it to the damsel, who stowed him and it away
under the warlock's bed. Soon the old warlock came
home. He was ailing, and said so. The girl wept
and said, <q>Alas, daddy is dying; he has a heart in his
breast after all.</q> <q>Child,</q> replied the warlock, <q>hold
your tongue. I <emph>can't</emph> die. It will soon pass over.</q>
At that the young man under the bed gave the bird a
gentle squeeze; and as he did so, the old warlock felt
very unwell and sat down. Then the young man
gripped the bird tighter, and the warlock fell senseless
from his chair. <q>Now squeeze him dead,</q> cried the
damsel. Her lover obeyed, and when the bird was
dead, the old warlock also lay dead on the floor.<note place='foot'>K. Müllenhoff, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig-Holstein
und Lauenburg</hi>, p. 404 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the Norse tale of <q>the giant who had no heart
in his body,</q> the giant tells the captive princess, <q>Far,
far away in a lake lies an island, on that island stands
a church, in that church is a well, in that well swims a
duck, in that duck there is an egg, and in that egg there
lies my heart.</q> The hero of the tale obtains the egg
and squeezes it, at which the giant screams piteously
and begs for his life. But the hero breaks the egg in
pieces and the giant at once bursts.<note place='foot'>Asbjörnsen og Moe, <hi rend='italic'>Norske Folke-Eventyr</hi>,
No. 36; Dasent, <hi rend='italic'>Popular
Tales from the Norse</hi>, p. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another Norse
story a hill-ogre tells the captive princess that she will
never be able to return home unless she finds the
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
grain of sand which lies under the ninth tongue of the
ninth head of a certain dragon; but if that grain of
sand were to come over the rock in which the ogres live,
they would all burst <q>and the rock itself would become
a gilded palace, and the lake green meadows.</q> The
hero finds the grain of sand and takes it to the top of
the high rock in which the ogres live. So all the ogres
burst and the rest falls out as one of the ogres had
foretold.<note place='foot'>Asbjörnsen og Moe, <hi rend='italic'>Norske Folke-Eventyr</hi>,
Ny Samling, No. 70; Dasent,
<hi rend='italic'>Tales from the Fjeld</hi>, p. 229 (<q>Boots
and the Beasts.</q>)</note> In an Icelandic parallel to the story of
Meleager, the spae-wives or sybils come and foretell
the high destiny of the infant Gestr as he lies in his
cradle. Two candles were burning beside the child,
and the youngest of the spae-wives, conceiving herself
slighted, cried out, <q>I foretell that the child shall live
no longer than this candle burns.</q> Whereupon the
chief sybil put out the candle and gave it to Gestr's
mother to keep, charging her not to light it again
until her son should wish to die. Gestr lived three
hundred years; then he kindled the candle and
expired.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>,
p. 592; Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the
Scottish Language</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Yule.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
In a Celtic tale a giant says, <q>There is a great
flagstone under the threshold. There is a wether
under the flag. There is a duck in the wether's belly,
and an egg in the belly of the duck, and it is in the egg
that my soul is.</q> The egg is crushed, and the giant
falls down dead.<note place='foot'>J. F. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales of
the West Highlands</hi>, i. p. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Celtic tale, a sea beast
has carried off a king's daughter, and an old smith
declares that there is no way of killing the beast but
one. <q>In the island that is in the midst of the loch
is Eillid Chaisthion&mdash;the white-footed hind, of the
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
slenderest legs, and the swiftest step, and, though she
should be caught, there would spring a hoodie out of
her, and though the hoodie should be caught, there
would spring a trout out of her, but there is an egg in
the mouth of the trout, and the soul of the beast is in
the egg, and if the egg breaks, the beast is dead.</q> As
usual the egg is broken and the beast dies.<note place='foot'>J. F. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales of
the West Highlands</hi>, i. p. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In a
Breton story there figures a giant whom neither fire
nor water nor steel can harm. He tells a princess
whom he has just married, <q>I am immortal, and no
one can hurt me, unless he crushes on my breast an
egg which is in a pigeon, which is in the belly of a
hare; this hare is in the belly of a wolf, and this wolf
is in the belly of my brother, who dwells a thousand
leagues from here. So I am quite easy on that score.</q>
A soldier gets the egg and crushes it on the breast of
the giant, who immediately expires.<note place='foot'>Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de la
Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1885), p. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another
Breton tale a giant is called Body-without-Soul because
his life does not reside in his body. It resides in an
egg, the egg is in a dove, the dove is in a hare, the
hare is in a wolf, and the wolf is in an iron chest at the
bottom of the sea. The hero kills the animals one
after another, and at the death of each animal the
giant grows weaker, as if he had lost a limb. When at
last the hero comes to the giant's castle bearing the
egg in his hand, he finds Body-without-Soul stretched
on his bed at the point of death. So he dashes the
egg against the giant's forehead, the egg breaks, and
the giant straightway dies.<note place='foot'>F. M. Luzel, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de
Basse-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1887), i. 445-449.</note>
</p>

<p>
The notion of an external soul has now been traced
in folk-tales told by Aryan peoples from India to
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
Brittany and the Hebrides. We have still to show
that the same idea occurs commonly in the popular
stories of non-Aryan peoples. In the first place it
appears in the ancient Egyptian story of <q>The Two
Brothers.</q> This story was written down in the reign
of Rameses II, about 1300 years <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> It is therefore
older than our present redaction of Homer, and far older
than the Bible. The outline of the story, so far as it
concerns us here, is as follows: Once upon a time there
were two brethren; the name of the elder was Anupu
and the name of the younger was Bitiu. Now Anupu
had a house and a wife, and his younger brother dwelt
with him as his servant. It was Anupu who made the
garments, and every morning when it grew light he
drove the kine afield. As he walked behind them they
used to say to him, <q>The grass is good in such and such
a place,</q> and he heard what they said and led them to
the good pasture that they desired. So his kine grew
very sleek and multiplied greatly. One day when the
two brothers were at work in the field the elder brother
said to the younger, <q>Run and fetch seed from the
village.</q> So the younger brother ran and said to the
wife of his elder brother, <q>Give me seed that I may
run to the field, for my brother sent me saying, tarry
not.</q> She said, <q>Go to the barn and take as much as
you desire.</q> He went and filled a jar full of wheat
and barley, and came forth bearing it on his shoulders.
When the woman saw him her heart went out to him,
and she laid hold of him and said, <q>Come, let us rest
an hour together.</q> But he said, <q>Thou art to me
as a mother, and my brother is to me as a father.</q> So
he would not hearken to her, but took the load on his
back and went away to the field. In the evening,
when the elder brother was returning from the field,
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
his wife feared for what she had said. So she took
soot and made herself as one who has been beaten.
And when her husband came home, she said, <q>When
thy younger brother came to fetch seed, he said to me,
Come, let us rest an hour together. But I would not,
and he beat me.</q> Then the elder brother became like
a panther of the south; he sharpened his knife and
stood behind the door of the cow-house. And when
the sun set and the younger brother came laden
with all the herbs of the field, as was his wont every
day, the cow that walked in front of the herd said to
him, <q>Behold, thy elder brother stands with a knife to
kill thee. Flee before him.</q> When he heard what
the cow said, he looked under the door of the cow-house
and saw the feet of his elder brother standing behind
the door, his knife in his hand. So he fled and his
brother pursued him with the knife. But the younger
brother cried for help to the Sun, and the Sun heard
him and caused a great water to spring up between
him and his elder brother, and the water was full of
crocodiles. The two brothers stood, the one on the
one side of the water and the other on the other, and
the younger brother told the elder brother all that had
befallen. So the elder brother repented him of what
he had done and he wept aloud. But he could not
come at the farther bank by reason of the crocodiles.
His younger brother called to him and said, <q>Go home
and tend the cattle thyself. For I will dwell no more
in the place where thou art. I will go to the Valley of
the Acacia. But this is what thou shalt do for me.
Thou shalt come and care for me, if evil befalls me, for
I will enchant my heart and place it on the top of the
flower of the Acacia; and if they cut the Acacia and
my heart falls to the ground, thou shalt come and seek
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
it, and when thou hast found it thou shalt lay it in a
vessel of fresh water. Then I shall come to life again.
But this is the sign that evil has befallen me; the pot
of beer in thine hand shall bubble.</q> So he went away
to the Valley of the Acacia, but his brother returned
home with dust on his head and slew his wife and cast
her to the dogs.
</p>

<p>
For many days afterwards the younger brother
dwelt alone in the Valley of the Acacia. By day
he hunted the beasts of the field, but at evening he
came and laid him down under the Acacia, on the
top of whose flower was his heart. And many days
after that he built himself a house in the Valley of the
Acacia. But the gods were grieved for him; and the
Sun said to Khnum, <q>Make a wife for Bitiu, that he
may not dwell alone.</q> So Khnum made him a woman
to dwell with him, who was perfect in her limbs more
than any woman on earth, for all the gods were in her.
So she dwelt with him. But one day a lock of her
hair fell into the river and floated down to the land of
Egypt, to the house of Pharaoh's washerwomen. The
fragrance of the lock perfumed Pharaoh's raiment, and
the washerwomen were blamed, for it was said, <q>An
odour of perfume in the garments of Pharaoh!</q> So
the heart of Pharaoh's chief washerman was weary of
the complaints that were made every day, and he went
to the quay, and there in the water he saw the lock of
hair. He sent one down into the river to fetch it, and,
because it smelt sweetly, he took it to Pharaoh. Then
Pharaoh's magicians were sent for and they said, <q>This
lock of hair belongs to a daughter of the Sun, who has
in her the essence of all the gods. Let messengers go
forth to all foreign lands to seek her.</q> So the woman
was brought from the Valley of the Acacia with chariots
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
and archers and much company, and all the land of
Egypt rejoiced at her coming, and Pharaoh loved her.
But when they asked her of her husband, she said to
Pharaoh, <q>Let them cut down the Acacia and let them
destroy him.</q> So men were sent with tools to cut
down the Acacia. They came to it and cut the flower
upon which was the heart of Bitiu; and he fell down
dead in that evil hour. But the next day, when the
elder brother of Bitiu was entered into his house and
had sat down, they brought him a pot of beer and it
bubbled, and they gave him a jug of wine and it grew
turbid. Then he took his staff and his sandals and
hied him to the Valley of the Acacia, and there he found
his younger brother lying dead in his house. So he
sought for the heart of his brother under the Acacia.
For three years he sought in vain, but in the fourth
year he found it in the berry of the Acacia. So he
threw the heart into a cup of fresh water. And when
it was night and the heart had sucked in much water,
Bitiu shook in all his limbs and revived. Then he
drank the cup of water in which his heart was, and his
heart went into its place, and he lived as before.<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de l'Égypte ancienne</hi> (Paris, 1882), p. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the story of Seyf-el-Mulook in the Arabian
Nights, the Jinnee declares, <q>When I was born, the
astrologers declared that the destruction of my soul
would be effected by the hand of one of the sons of the
human kings. I therefore took my soul, and put it
into the crop of a sparrow, and I imprisoned the sparrow
in a little box, and put this into another small box, and
this I put within seven other small boxes, and I put
these within seven chests, and the chests I put into a
coffer of marble within the verge of this circumambient
ocean; for this part is remote from the countries of
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
mankind, and none of mankind can gain access to it.</q>
But Seyf-el-Mulook got possession of the sparrow and
strangled it, and the Jinnee fell upon the ground a
heap of black ashes.<note place='foot'>Lane's <hi rend='italic'>Arabian Nights</hi>, iii. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a modern Arabian tale a
king marries an ogress, who puts out the eyes of the
king's forty wives. One of the blinded queens gives
birth to a son whom she names Mohammed the Prudent.
But the ogress queen hated him and compassed his
death. So she sent him on an errand to the house of
her kinsfolk the ogres. In the house of the ogres he
saw some things hanging from the roof, and on asking
a female slave what they were, she said, <q>That is the
bottle which contains the life of my lady the queen,
and the other bottle beside it contains the eyes of the
queens whom my mistress blinded.</q> A little afterwards
he spied a beetle and rose to kill it. <q>Don't
kill it,</q> cried the slave, <q>for that is my life.</q> But
Mohammed the Prudent watched the beetle till it
entered a chink in the wall; and when the female slave
had fallen asleep, he killed the beetle in its hole, and so
the slave died. Then Mohammed took down the two
bottles and carried them home to his father's palace.
There he presented himself before the ogress queen
and said, <q>See, I have your life in my hand, but I will
not kill you till you have replaced the eyes which you
took from the forty queens.</q> The ogress did as she
was bid, and then Mohammed the Prudent said,
<q>There, take your life.</q> But the bottle slipped from
his hand and fell, the life of the ogress escaped from
it, and she died.<note place='foot'>G. Spitta-Bey, <hi rend='italic'>Contes arabes
modernes</hi> (Leyden and Paris, 1883),
No. 2, p. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The story in its
main outlines is identical with the
Cashmeer story of <q>The Ogress Queen</q>
(J. H. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales of Kashmir</hi>,
p. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) and the Bengalee story of
<q>The Boy whom Seven Mothers
Suckled</q> (Lal Behari Day, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-tales
of Bengal</hi>, p. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
i. 170 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) In another Arabian
story the life of a witch is bound up
with a phial: when it is broken, she
dies. W. A. Clouston, <hi rend='italic'>A Group of
Eastern Romances and Stories</hi>, p. 30.
A similar incident occurs in a Cashmeer
story. Knowles, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 73. In
the Arabian story mentioned in the
text, the hero, by a genuine touch of
local colour, is made to drink the milk
of an ogress's breasts and hence is
regarded by her as her son. Cp. W.
Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Kinship and Marriage
in Early Arabia</hi>, p. 149; and for the
same mode of creating kinship among
other races, see D'Abbadie, <hi rend='italic'>Douze ans
dans la Haute Ethiopie</hi>, p. 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Tausch, <q>Notices of the Circassians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Royal Asiatic Soc.</hi> i. (1834) p.
104; Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo
Koosh</hi>, pp. 77, 83 (cp. Leitner, <hi rend='italic'>Languages
and Races of Dardistan</hi>, p. 34);
Denzil Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Settlement Report of
the Panipat, Tahsil, and Karnal Parganah
of the Karnal District</hi>, p. 101;
Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Royaume du Cambodge</hi>, i. 427;
F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte und Brauch der
Südslaven</hi>, p. 14.</note>
</p>

<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>

<p>
In a Kabyl story an ogre declares that his fate is
far away in an egg, which is in a pigeon, which is in a
camel, which is in the sea. The hero procures the egg
and crushes it between his hands, and the ogre dies.<note place='foot'>Rivière, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires de la
Kabylie du Djurdjura</hi>, p. 191.</note>
In a Magyar folk-tale, an old witch detains a young
prince called Ambrose in the bowels of the earth. At
last she confided to him that she kept a wild boar in a
silken meadow, and if it were killed, they would find a
hare inside, and inside the hare a pigeon, and inside
the pigeon a small box, and inside the box one black
and one shining beetle: the shining beetle held her
life, and the black one held her power; if these two
beetles died, then her life would come to an end also.
When the old hag went out, Ambrose killed the wild
boar, took out the hare, from the hare he took the
pigeon, from the pigeon the box, and from the box the
two beetles; he killed the black beetle, but kept the
shining one alive. So the witch's power left her
immediately, and when she came home, she had to
take to her bed. Having learned from her how to
escape from his prison to the upper air, Ambrose
killed the shining beetle, and the old hag's spirit left
her at once.<note place='foot'>W. H. Jones and L. L. Kropf,
<hi rend='italic'>The Folk-tales of the Magyar</hi> (London,
1889), p. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Hungarian story the safety
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
of the Dwarf-king resides in a golden cockchafer,
inside a golden cock, inside a golden sheep, inside a
golden stag, in the ninety-ninth island. The hero
overcomes all these golden animals and so recovers
his bride, whom the Dwarf-king had carried off.<note place='foot'>R. H. Busk, <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore of Rome</hi>,
p. 168.</note> A
Samoyed story tells how seven warlocks killed a certain
man's mother and carried off his sister, whom they
kept to serve them. Every night when they came
home the seven warlocks used to take out their hearts
and place them in a dish, which the woman hung on
the tent-poles. But the wife of the man whom they
had wronged stole the hearts of the warlocks while
they slept, and took them to her husband. By break
of day he went with the hearts to the warlocks, and
found them at the point of death. They all begged
for their hearts; but he threw six of their hearts to
the ground, and six of the warlocks died. The seventh
and eldest warlock begged hard for his heart, and the
man said, <q>You killed my mother. Make her alive
again, and I will give you back your heart.</q> The
warlock said to his wife, <q>Go to the place where the
dead woman lies. You will find a bag there. Bring
it to me. The woman's spirit is in the bag.</q> So his
wife brought the bag; and the warlock said to the man,
<q>Go to your dead mother, shake the bag and let the
spirit breathe over her bones; so she will come to life
again.</q> The man did as he was bid, and his mother
was restored to life. Then he hurled the seventh
heart to the ground, and the seventh warlock died.<note place='foot'>Castren, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnologische Vorlesungen
über die Altaischen Völker</hi>, p. 173 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In a Tartar poem two heroes named Ak Molot
and Bulat engage in mortal combat. Ak Molot pierces
his foe through and through with an arrow, grapples
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
with him, and dashes him to the ground, but all in
vain, Bulat could not die. At last when the combat
has lasted three years, a friend of Ak Molot sees a
golden casket hanging by a white thread from the sky,
and bethinks him that perhaps this casket contains
Bulat's soul. So he shot through the white thread
with an arrow, and down fell the casket. He opened
it, and in the casket sat ten white birds, and one of the
birds was Bulat's soul. Bulat wept when he saw that
his soul was found in the casket. But one after the other
the birds were killed, and then Ak Molot easily slew his
foe.<note place='foot'>Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>Heldensagen der Minussinschen Tataren</hi>, pp. 172-176.</note> In another Tartar poem, two brothers going to
fight two other brothers take out their souls and hide
them in the form of a white herb with six stalks in a
deep pit. But one of their foes sees them doing so and
digs up their souls, which he puts into a golden ram's
horn, and then puts the ram's horn in his quiver. The
two warriors whose souls have thus been stolen know
that they have no chance of victory, and accordingly
make peace with their enemies.<note place='foot'>Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 108-112.</note> In another Tartar
poem a terrible demon sets all the gods and heroes at
defiance. At last a valiant youth fights the demon,
binds him hand and foot, and slices him with his sword.
But still the demon is not slain. So the youth asked
him, <q>Tell me, where is your soul hidden? For if your
soul had been hidden in your body, you must have
been dead long ago.</q> The demon replied, <q>On the
saddle of my horse is a bag. In the bag is a serpent
with twelve heads. In the serpent is my soul. When
you have killed the serpent, you have killed me also.</q>
So the youth took the saddle-bag from the horse and
killed the twelve-headed serpent, whereupon the demon
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
expired.<note place='foot'>Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 360-364;
Castren, <hi rend='italic'>Vorlesungen über die finnische
Mythologie</hi>, p. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another Tartar poem a hero called Kök
Chan deposits with a maiden a golden ring, in which is
half his strength. Afterwards when Kök Chan is
wrestling long with a hero and cannot kill him, a
woman drops into his mouth the ring which contains
half his strength. Thus inspired with fresh force he
slays his enemy.<note place='foot'>Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 189-193.
In another Tartar poem (Schiefner, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 390 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) a boy's soul is shut up
by his enemies in a box. While the
soul is in the box, the boy is dead;
when it is taken out, he is restored to
life. In the same poem (p. 384) the
soul of a horse is kept shut up in a box,
because it is feared the owner of the
horse will become the greatest hero on
earth. But these cases are, to some
extent, the converse of those in the text.</note>
</p>

<p>
In a Mongolian story the hero Joro gets the
better of his enemy the lama Tschoridong in the
following way. The lama, who is an enchanter, sends
out his soul in the form of a wasp to sting Joro's
eyes. But Joro catches the wasp in his hand, and by
alternately shutting and opening his hand he causes
the lama alternately to lose and recover consciousness.<note place='foot'>Schott, <q>Ueber die Sage von
Geser Chan,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen d. Königl.
Akad. d. Wissensch. zu Berlin</hi>, 1851, p.
269.</note>
In a Tartar poem two youths cut open the body of an
old witch and tear out her bowels, but all to no purpose,
she still lives. On being asked where her soul
is, she answers that it is in the middle of her shoe-sole
in the form of a seven-headed speckled snake. So
one of the youths slices her shoe-sole with his sword,
takes out the speckled snake, and cuts off its seven
heads. Then the witch dies.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>Proben der Volkslitteratur
der türkischen Stämme Süd-Siberiens</hi>,
ii. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Another Tartar poem
describes how the hero Kartaga grappled with the
Swan-woman. Long they wrestled. Moons waxed
and waned and still they wrestled; years came and
went, and still the struggle went on. But the piebald
horse and the black horse knew that the Swan-woman's
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
soul was not in her. Under the black earth flow
nine seas; where the seas meet and form one, the sea
comes to the surface of the earth. At the mouth of
the nine seas rises a rock of copper; it rises to the
surface of the ground, it rises up between heaven and
earth, this rock of copper. At the foot of the copper
rock is a black chest, in the black chest is a golden
casket, and in the golden casket is the soul of the
Swan-woman. Seven little birds are the soul of the
Swan-woman; if the birds are killed the Swan-woman
will die straightway. So the horses ran to the foot of
the copper rock, opened the black chest, and brought
back the golden casket. Then the piebald horse
turned himself into a bald-headed man, opened the
golden casket, and cut off the heads of the seven birds.
So the Swan-woman died.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 531 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In a Tartar story a chief
called Tash Kan is asked where his soul is. He
answers that there are seven great poplars, and under
the poplars a golden well; seven <foreign rend='italic'>Maralen</foreign> (?) come to
drink the water of the well, and the belly of one of
them trails on the ground; in this <foreign rend='italic'>Maral</foreign> is a golden
box, in the golden box is a silver box, in the silver
box are seven quails, the head of one of the quails
is golden and its tail silver; that quail is Tash
Kan's soul. The hero of the story gets possession
of the seven quails and wrings the necks of six of
them. Then Tash Kan comes running and begs the
hero to let his soul go free. But the hero wrings the
quail's neck, and Tash Kan drops dead.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, iv. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In another
Tartar poem the hero, pursuing his sister who has
driven away his cattle, is warned to desist from the
pursuit because his sister has carried away his soul in
a golden sword and a golden arrow, and if he pursues
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
her she will kill him by throwing the golden sword or
shooting the golden arrow at him.<note place='foot'>W. Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 345 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
A Malay poem relates how once upon a time in
the city of Indrapoera there was a certain merchant
who was rich and prosperous, but he had no children.
One day as he walked with his wife by the river they
found a baby girl, fair as an angel. So they adopted
the child and called her Bidasari. The merchant
caused a golden fish to be made, and into this fish he
transferred the soul of his adopted daughter. Then
he put the golden fish in a golden box full of water, and
hid it in a pond in the midst of his garden. In time
the girl grew to be a lovely woman. Now the King
of Indrapoera had a fair young queen, who lived in
fear that the king might take to himself a second wife.
So, hearing of the charms of Bidasari, the queen
resolved to put her out of the way. So she lured the
girl to the palace and tortured her cruelly; but
Bidasari could not die, because her soul was not in her.
At last she could stand the torture no longer and said
to the queen, <q>If you wish me to die, you must bring
the box which is in the pond in my father's garden.</q>
So the box was brought and opened, and there was
the golden fish in the water. The girl said, <q>My soul
is in that fish. In the morning you must take the fish
out of the water, and in the evening you must put it
back into the water. Do not let the fish lie about, but
bind it round your neck. If you do this, I shall soon
die.</q> So the queen took the fish out of the box and
fastened it round her neck; and no sooner had she
done so, than Bidasari fell into a swoon. But in the
evening, when the fish was put back into the water,
Bidasari came to herself again. Seeing that she thus
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
had the girl in her power, the queen sent her home to
her adopted parents. To save her from further persecution
her parents resolved to remove their daughter from
the city. So in a lonely and desolate spot they built a
house and brought Bidasari thither. Here she dwelt
alone, undergoing vicissitudes that corresponded with
the vicissitudes of the golden fish in which was her
soul. All day long, while the fish was out of the
water, she remained unconscious; but in the evening,
when the fish was put into the water, she revived.
One day the king was out hunting, and coming to
the house where Bidasari lay unconscious, was smitten
with her beauty. He tried to waken her, but in vain.
Next day, towards evening, he repeated his visit, but
still found her unconscious. However, when darkness
fell, she came to herself and told the king the secret of
her life. So the king returned to the palace, took the
fish from the queen, and put it in water. Immediately
Bidasari revived, and the king took her to wife.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>De Simsonsage,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>De Gids</hi>, 1888, No. 5, p. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (of
the separate reprint). Cp. Backer,
<hi rend='italic'>L'Archipel Indien</hi>, pp. 144-149.</note>
</p>

<p>
The last story of an external soul which I shall notice
comes from Nias, an island to the west of Sumatra,
which we have visited more than once in the course of
this book. Once on a time a chief was captured by
his enemies, who tried to put him to death but failed.
Water would not drown him nor fire burn him nor
steel pierce him. At last his wife revealed the secret.
On his head he had a hair as hard as a copper wire;
and with this wire his life was bound up. So the hair
was plucked out, and with it his spirit fled.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,
<q>Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandel. van het Batav. Genootsch. v.
Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx. p.
111; Sundermann, <q>Die Insel Nias,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>, xi.
(1884) p. 453.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. The external soul in folk-custom.'/>
<head>§ 4.&mdash;The external soul in folk-custom.</head>

<p>
Thus the idea that the soul may be deposited for
a longer or shorter time in some place of security
outside the body, or at all events in the hair, is found
in the popular tales of many races. It remains to show
that the idea is not a mere figment devised to adorn a
tale, but is a real article of primitive faith, which has
given rise to a corresponding set of customs.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that in the tales the hero, as a
preparation for battle, sometimes removes his soul
from his body, in order that his body may be invulnerable
and immortal in the combat. With a like
intention the savage removes his soul from his body
on various occasions of real or imaginary danger.
Thus we have seen that among the Minahassa of
Celebes, when a family moves into a new house, a
priest collects the souls of the whole family in a bag,
and afterwards restores them to their owners, because
the moment of entering a new house is supposed to
be fraught with supernatural danger.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 134.</note> In Southern
Celebes when a woman is brought to bed the messenger
who fetches the doctor or the midwife always
carries with him a piece of iron, which he delivers to
the doctor. The doctor must keep it in his house till
the confinement is over, when he gives it back,
receiving a fixed sum of money for doing so. The
piece of iron represents the woman's soul, which at
this critical time is believed to be safer out of her body
than in it. Hence the doctor must take great care of
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
the piece of iron; for if it were lost, the woman's soul
would assuredly, it is supposed, be lost with it.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 54.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, we have seen that in folk-tales a man's soul
or strength is sometimes represented as bound up with
his hair, and that when his hair is cut off he dies or
grows weak. So the natives of Amboina used to
think that their strength was in their hair and would
desert them if it were shorn. A criminal under torture
in a Dutch Court of that island persisted in
denying his guilt till his hair was cut off, when he
immediately confessed. One man who was tried for
murder endured without flinching the utmost ingenuity
of his torturers till he saw the surgeon standing with a
pair of shears. On asking what this was for, and being
told that it was to cut his hair, he begged they would
not do it, and made a clean breast. In subsequent
cases, when torture failed to wring a confession from a
prisoner, the Dutch authorities made a practice of
cutting off his hair.<note place='foot'>F. Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en Nieuw Oost-Indiën</hi>,
ii. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>De
Simsonsage</hi>, p. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Ceram it is still believed that
if young people have their hair cut they will be
weakened and enervated thereby.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p. 137.</note> In Zacynthus
people think that the whole strength of the ancient
Greeks resided in three hairs on their breasts, and
vanished whenever these hairs were cut; but if the hairs
were allowed to grow again, their strength returned.<note place='foot'>B. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Volksleben der
Neugriechen</hi>, p. 206.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, we have seen that in folk-tales the life of a
person is sometimes so bound up with the life of a plant
that the withering of the plant will immediately follow
or be followed by the death of the person.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>.</note> Similarly
among the M'Bengas in Western Africa, about the
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
Gaboon, when two children are born on the same day,
the people plant two trees of the same kind and dance
round them. The life of each of the children is believed
to be bound up with the life of one of the trees;
and if the tree dies or is thrown down, they are sure
that the child will soon die.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, ii. 223.</note> In the Cameroons, also,
the life of a person is believed to be sympathetically
bound up with that of a tree.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 165.</note> Some of the Papuans
unite the life of a new-born child sympathetically with
that of a tree by driving a pebble into the bark of the
tree. This is supposed to give them complete mastery
over the child's life; if the tree is cut down, the child
will die.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Ein Besuch in San Salvador</hi>,
p. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in
der Geschichte</hi>, iii. 193.</note> After a birth the Maoris used to bury the
navel-string in a sacred place and plant a young sapling
over it. As the tree grew, it was a <foreign rend='italic'>tohu oranga</foreign> or sign
of life for the child; if it flourished, the child would
prosper; if it withered and died, the parents augured
the worst for their child.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui; or,
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p.
184; Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour
du monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse
sur la corvette Astrolabe</hi>, ii. 444.</note> In Southern Celebes, when
a child is born, a cocoa-nut is planted, and is watered
with the water in which the after-birth and navel-string
have been washed. As it grows up, the tree is called
the <q>contemporary</q> of the child.<note place='foot'>Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie
van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 59.</note> So in Bali a cocoa-palm
is planted at the birth of a child. It is believed
to grow up equally with the child, and is called
its <q>life-plant.</q><note place='foot'>Van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het eiland
Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, N. S. ix. (1880) p. 417 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On certain occasions the Dyaks of
Borneo plant a palm-tree, which is believed to be a
complete index of their fate. If it flourishes, they
reckon on good fortune; but if it withers or dies, they
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
expect misfortune.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>De Simsonsage</hi>, p.
26.</note> It is said that there are still
families in Russia, Germany, England, France, and
Italy who are accustomed to plant a tree at the birth
of a child. The tree, it is hoped, will grow with the
child, and it is tended with special care.<note place='foot'>Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie des Plantes</hi>,
i. xxviii. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The custom
is still pretty general in the canton of Aargau in
Switzerland; an apple-tree is planted for a boy and
a pear-tree for a girl, and the people think that the
child will flourish or dwindle with the tree.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 50; Ploss,
<hi rend='italic'>Das Kind</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 79.</note> In
Mecklenburg the after-birth is thrown out at the foot
of a young tree, and the child is then believed to grow
with the tree.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</hi>, ii. 43, No.
63.</note> In England persons are sometimes
passed through a cleft tree as a cure for rupture, and
thenceforward a sympathetic connection is believed to
exist between them and the tree. <q>Thomas Chillingworth,
son of the owner of an adjoining farm, now
about thirty-four years of age, was, when an infant
of a year old, passed through a similar tree, now
perfectly sound, which he preserves with so much care
that he will not suffer a single branch to be touched,
for it is believed that the life of the patient depends on
the life of the tree; and the moment that it is cut
down, be the patient ever so distant, the rupture
returns, and a mortification ensues.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Gentleman's Magazine</hi>, October
1804, p. 909, quoted by Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, iii. 289; W. G.
Black, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-medicine</hi>, pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 67.</note> When Lord
Byron first visited his ancestral estate of Newstead
<q>he planted, it seems, a young oak in some part of
the grounds, and had an idea that as <emph>it</emph> flourished
so should <emph>he</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>Moore's <hi rend='italic'>Life of Lord Byron</hi>, i. 101.</note>
</p>

<p>
But in practice, as in folk-tales, it is not merely
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
with trees and plants that the life of an individual is
occasionally believed to be united by a bond of physical
sympathy. The same bond, it is supposed, may
exist between a man and an animal or a thing,
so that the death or destruction of the animal or
thing is immediately followed by the death of the
man. The Emperor Romanus Lecapenus was once
informed by an astronomer that the life of Simeon
prince of Bulgaria was bound up with a certain column
in Constantinople, so that if the capital of the column
were removed Simeon would immediately die. The
Emperor took the hint and removed the capital, and at
the same hour, as the emperor learned by inquiry,
Simeon died of heart disease in Bulgaria.<note place='foot'>Cedrenus, <hi rend='italic'>Compend. Histor.</hi> p.
625 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, vol. ii. p. 308, ed. Bekker.</note> Amongst
the Karens of Burma <q>the knife with which the navel-string
is cut is carefully preserved for the child. The
life of the child is supposed to be in some way connected
with it, for if lost or destroyed it is said the child
will not be long-lived.</q><note place='foot'>F. Mason, <q>Physical Character of
the Karens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal</hi>, 1866, pt. ii. p. 9.</note> The Malays believe that
<q>the soul of a person may pass into another person
or into an animal, or rather that such a mysterious
relation can arise between the two that the fate of the
one is wholly dependent on that of the other.</q><note place='foot'>Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Makassarsch-Hollandsch
Woordenboek</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>soemâñgá</hi>, p. 569;
G. A. Wilken, <q>Het animísme bij de
volken van den Indischen Archipel,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, June 1884, p. 933.</note> In
the Banks Islands <q>some people connect themselves
with an object, generally an animal, as a lizard or a
snake, or with a stone, which they imagine to have a
certain very close natural relation to themselves. This,
at Mota, is called tamaniu&mdash;likeness. This word at
Aurora is used for the <q>atai</q> [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> soul] of Mota. Some
fancy dictates the choice of a tamaniu; or it may be
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
found by drinking the infusion of certain herbs and
heaping together the dregs. Whatever living thing is
first seen in or upon the heap is the tamaniu. It is
watched, but not fed or worshipped. The natives
believe that it comes at call. The life of the man is
bound up with the life of his tamaniu. If it dies, gets
broken or lost, the man will die. In sickness they
send to see how the tamaniu is, and judge the issue
accordingly. This is only the fancy of some.</q><note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <q>Notes on the
Customs of Mota, Banks Islands</q>
(communicated by the Rev. Lorimer
Fison), <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Royal Society
of Victoria</hi>, xvi. 136.</note>
</p>

<p>
But what among the Banks Islanders and the
Malays is irregular and occasional, among other
peoples is systematic and universal. The Zulus
believe that every man has his <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign>, a kind of
mysterious serpent, <q>which specially guards and helps
him, lives with him, wakes with him, sleeps and travels
with him, but always under ground. If it ever makes
its appearance, great is the joy, and the man must seek
to discover the meaning of its appearance. He who has
no <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign> must die. Therefore if any one unintentionally
kills an <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign> serpent, the man whose <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign> it was
dies, but the serpent comes to life again.</q><note place='foot'>F. Speckmann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Hermannsburger
Mission in Afrika</hi> (Hermannsburg,
1876), p. 167.</note> Amongst
the Zapotecs of Central America, when a woman was
about to be confined, her relations assembled in the
hut, and began to draw on the floor figures of different
animals, rubbing each one out as soon as it was completed.
This went on till the moment of birth, and
the figure that then remained sketched upon the
ground was called the child's <foreign rend='italic'>tona</foreign> or second self.
<q>When the child grew old enough he procured the
animal that represented him and took care of it, as it
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
was believed that health and existence were bound up
with that of the animal's, in fact that the death of both
would occur simultaneously,</q> or rather that when the
animal died the man would die.<note place='foot'>Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific
Coast</hi>, i. 661. The words quoted by
Bancroft (p. 662, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>) <q><foreign rend='italic'>Consérvase
entre ellos la creencia de que su vida
está unida à la de un animal, y que es
forzoso que mueran ellos cuando éste
muere</foreign>,</q> are not quite accurately represented
by the statement of Bancroft
in the text.</note> Among the Indians
of Guatemala the <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>naual</foreign> is an <q>animate or
inanimate object, generally an animal, which stands in
a parallel relation to a particular man, so that the weal
and woe of the man depend on the fate of the animal.</q>
Among the Chontal Indians who inhabit the part of
Honduras bordering on Guatemala and in point of
social culture stand very close to the Pipil Indians of
Guatemala, the <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> used to be obtained as follows.
The young Indian went into the forest to a lonely
place by a river or to the top of a mountain, and
prayed with tears to the gods that they would vouchsafe
to him what his forefathers had possessed before
him. After sacrificing a dog or a bird he laid himself
down to sleep. Then in a dream or after awakening
from sleep there appeared to him a jaguar, puma, coyote
(prairie-wolf), crocodile, serpent, or bird. To this
visionary animal the Indian offered blood drawn from
his tongue, his ears, and other parts of his body, and
prayed for an abundant yield of salt and cacao. Then
the animal said to him, <q>On such and such a day you
shall go out hunting, and the first animal that meets
you will be myself, who will always be your companion
and <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>.</q> A man who had no <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> could never
grow rich. The Indians were persuaded that the death
of their <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> would entail their own. Legend
affirms that in the first battles with the Spaniards on
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
the plateau of Quetzaltenango the <foreign rend='italic'>naguals</foreign> of the
Indian chiefs fought in the form of serpents. The
<foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> of the highest chief was especially conspicuous,
because it had the form of a great bird, resplendent in
green plumage. The Spanish general Pedro de
Alvarado killed the bird with his lance, and at the
same moment the Indian chief fell dead to the ground.<note place='foot'>Otto Stoll, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ethnologie der
Indianerstämme von Guatemala</hi> (Leyden,
1889), p. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Races of the Pacific States</hi>, i. 740 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer des alten
Amerika</hi>, ii. 282.</note>
</p>

<p>
In many of the Australian tribes each sex regards
a particular species of animals in the same way that a
Central American Indian regards his <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign>, but with
this difference, that whereas the Indian apparently
knows the individual animal with which his life is
bound up, the Australians only know that each of their
lives is bound up with some one animal of the species,
but they cannot say with which. The result naturally
is that every man spares and protects all the animals
of the species with which the lives of the men are
bound up; and every woman spares and protects all
the animals of the species with which the lives of the
women are bound up; because no one knows but that
the death of any animal of the respective species might
entail his or her own; just as the killing of the green
bird was immediately followed by the death of the
Indian chief, and the killing of the parrot by the death
of Punchkin in the fairy tale. Thus, for example, the
Wotjobaluk tribe of South Eastern Australia <q>held
that <q>the life of Ngŭnŭngŭnŭt (the Bat) is the life of a
man and the life of Yártatgŭrk (the Nightjar) is the
life of a woman,</q> and that when either of these creatures
is killed the life of some man or of some woman is
shortened. In such a case every man or every woman
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
in the camp feared that he or she might be the victim,
and from this cause great fights arose in this tribe. I
learn that in these fights, men on one side and women
on the other, it was not at all certain which would be
victorious, for at times the women gave the men a
severe drubbing with their yamsticks while often
women were injured or killed by spears.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>Further Notes
on the Australian Class Systems,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xviii. 58.</note> The
particular species of animals with which the lives of
the sexes were believed to be respectively bound up
varied somewhat from tribe to tribe. Thus whereas
among the Wotjobaluk the bat was the animal of the
men, at Gunbower Creek on the lower Murray the bat
seems to have been the animal of the women, for the
natives would not kill it for the reason that <q>if it was
killed, one of their lubras [women] would be sure to
die in consequence.</q><note place='foot'>Gerard Krefft, <q>Manners and
Customs of the Aborigines of the Lower
Murray and Darling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transact. Philos.
Soc. New South Wales</hi>, 1862-65, p.
359 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But the belief itself and the
fights to which it gave rise are known to have
extended over a large part of South Eastern Australia,
and probably they extended much farther.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> The
belief is a very serious one, and so consequently are
the fights which spring from it. Thus where the bat is
the men's animal they <q>protect it against injury, even
to the half-killing of their wives for its sake;</q> and
where the fern owl or large goatsucker (a night bird) is
the women's animal, <q>it is jealously protected by them.
If a man kills one, they are as much enraged as if it
was one of their children, and will strike him with their
long poles.</q><note place='foot'>Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 52.</note>
</p>

<p>
The jealous protection thus afforded by Australian
men and women to bats and owls respectively (for bats
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
and owls seem to be the creatures usually allotted to
men and women respectively) is not based upon purely
selfish considerations. For each man believes that
not only his own life, but the lives of his father, brothers,
sons, etc., are bound up with the lives of particular
bats, and that therefore in protecting the bat species
he is protecting the lives of all his male relations as
well as his own. Similarly, each woman believes that
the lives of her mother, sisters, daughters, etc., equally
with her own, are bound up with the lives of particular
owls, and that in guarding the owl species she is guarding
the lives of all her female relations in addition to
her own. Now, when men's lives are thus supposed
to be contained in certain animals, it is obvious that
the animals can hardly be distinguished from the men,
or the men from the animals. If my brother John's
life is in a bat, then, on the one hand, the bat is my
brother as well as John; and, on the other hand, John
is in a sense a bat, since his life is in a bat. Similarly,
if my sister Mary's life is in an owl, then the owl is
my sister and Mary is an owl. This is a natural
enough conclusion, and the Australians have not failed
to draw it. When the bat is the man's animal, it is
called his brother; and when the owl is the woman's
animal, it is called her sister. And conversely a man
addresses a woman as an owl, and she addresses him
as a bat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiv. 350,
xv. 416, xviii. 57 (the <q>nightjar</q> is
apparently an owl).</note> So with the other animals allotted to the
sexes respectively in other tribes. For example,
among the Kurnai all Emu Wrens were <q>brothers</q>
of the men, and all the men were Emu Wrens; all
Superb Warblers were <q>sisters</q> of the women, and
all the women were Superb Warblers.<note place='foot'>Fison and Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and
Kurnai</hi>, pp. 194, 201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 215; <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xv. 416, xviii. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>

<p>
But when a savage names himself after an animal,
calls it his brother, and refuses to kill it, the animal is
said to be his totem. Accordingly the bat and the owl,
the Emu Wren and the Superb Warbler, may properly
be described as totems of the sexes. But the assignation
of a totem to a sex is comparatively rare, and
has hitherto been discovered nowhere but in Australia.
Far more commonly the totem is appropriated not to
a sex, but to a tribe or clan, and is hereditary either in
the male or female line. The relation of an individual
to the tribal totem does not differ in kind from his
relation to the sex totem; he will not kill it, he speaks
of it as his brother, and he calls himself by its name.<note place='foot'>The chief facts of totemism have
been collected by the present writer in
a little work, <hi rend='italic'>Totemism</hi> (Edinburgh, A.
and C. Black, 1887).</note>
Now if the relations are similar, the explanation which
holds good of the one ought equally to hold good of
the other. Therefore the reason why a tribe revere a
particular species of animals or plants (for the tribal
totem may be a plant) and call themselves after it, must
be a belief that the life of each individual of the tribe is
bound up with some one animal or plant of the species,
and that his or her death would be the consequence
of killing that particular animal, or destroying that
particular plant. This explanation of totemism squares
very well with Sir George Grey's definition of a totem
or <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign> in Western Australia. He says, <q>A certain
mysterious connection exists between a family and its
<foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign>, so that a member of the family will never kill
an animal of the species to which his <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign> belongs,
should he find it asleep; indeed he always kills it
reluctantly, and never without affording it a chance to
escape. This arises from the family belief that some
one individual of the species is their nearest friend, to
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
kill whom would be a great crime, and to be carefully
avoided. Similarly, a native who has a vegetable for
his <foreign rend='italic'>kobong</foreign> may not gather it under certain circumstances,
and at a particular period of the year.</q><note place='foot'>(Sir) George Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of
Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West
and Western Australia</hi>, ii. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here
it will be observed that though each man spares all the
animals or plants of the species, they are not all equally
precious to him; far from it, out of the whole species
there is only one which is specially dear to him; but
as he does not know which the dear one is, he is
obliged to spare them all from fear of injuring the one.
Again, this explanation of the tribal totem harmonises
with the supposed effect of killing one of the totem
species. <q>One day one of the blacks killed a crow.
Three or four days afterwards a Boortwa (crow) [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a
man of the Crow clan or tribe] named Larry died. He
had been ailing for some days, but the killing of his
wingong [totem] hastened his death.</q><note place='foot'>Fison and Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi and
Kurnai</hi>, p. 169.</note> Here the killing
of the crow caused the death of a man of the Crow
clan, exactly as, in the case of the sex totems, the killing
of a bat causes the death of a Bat man, or the killing
of an owl causes the death of an Owl woman. Similarly,
the killing of his <foreign rend='italic'>nagual</foreign> causes the death of a Central
American Indian, the killing of his <foreign rend='italic'>ihlozi</foreign> causes the
death of a Zulu, the killing of his <foreign rend='italic'>tamaniu</foreign> causes the
death of a Banks Islander, and the killing of the
animal in which his life is stowed away causes the
death of the giant or warlock in the fairy tale.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that the story of <q>The giant who
had no heart in his body</q> furnishes the key to the
religious aspect of totemism, that is, to the relation
which is supposed to subsist between a man and his
totem. The totem, if I am right, is simply the receptacle
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
in which a man keeps his life, as Punchkin kept
his life in a parrot, and Bidasari kept her soul in a
golden fish. It is no valid objection to this view that
when a savage has both a sex totem and a tribal totem
his life must be bound up with two different animals,
the death of either of which would entail his own. If
a man has more vital places than one in his body, why,
the savage may think, should he not have more vital
places than one outside it? Why, since he can externalise
his life, should he not transfer one portion of it
to one animal and another to another? The divisibility
of life, or, to put it otherwise, the plurality of
souls, is an idea suggested by many familiar facts,
and has commended itself to philosophers like Plato
as well as to savages. It is only when the notion
of a soul, from being a quasi-scientific hypothesis,
becomes a theological dogma that its unity and indivisibility
are insisted upon as essential. The savage,
unshackled by dogma, is free to explain the facts of
life by the assumption of as many souls as he thinks
necessary. Hence, for example, the Caribs supposed
that there was one soul in the head, another in the
heart, and other souls at all the places where an artery
is felt pulsating.<note place='foot'>De la Borde, <q>Relation de
l'Origine, etc. des Caraibes,</q> p. 15, in
<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de divers Voyages faits en Afrique
et en l'Amérique</hi> (Paris, 1684).</note> Some of the Hidatsa Indians explain
the phenomena of gradual death, when the extremities
appear dead first, by supposing that man has four
souls, and that they quit the body, not simultaneously,
but one after the other, dissolution being only complete
when all four have departed.<note place='foot'>Washington Matthews, <hi rend='italic'>The Hidatsa
Indians</hi>, p. 50.</note> The Laos suppose that
the body is the seat of thirty spirits, which reside in
the hands, the feet, the mouth, the eyes, etc.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volker des ostlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. 248.</note> Hence,
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
from the primitive point of view, it is perfectly possible
that a savage should have one soul in his sex totem,
and another in his tribal totem. However, as I have
observed, sex totems occur nowhere but in Australia; so
that as a rule the savage who practises totemism need
not have more than one soul out of his body at a time.
</p>

<p>
If this explanation of the totem as a receptacle in
which a man keeps his soul or one of his souls is
correct, we should expect to find some totemistic
tribes of whom it is expressly stated that every man
amongst them is believed to keep at least one soul
permanently out of his body, and that the destruction
of this external soul is supposed to entail the death of
its owner. Such a tribe are the Battas of Sumatra.
The Battas are divided into exogamous clans (<foreign rend='italic'>margas</foreign>)
with descent in the male line; and each clan is forbidden
to eat the flesh of a particular animal. One
clan may not eat the tiger, another the ape, another
the crocodile, another the dog, another the cat, another
the dove, another the white buffalo. The reason given
by members of a clan for abstaining from the flesh of
the particular animal is either that they are descended
from animals of that species, and that their souls after
death may transmigrate into the animals, or that they
or their forefathers have been under certain obligations
to the animals. Sometimes, but not always, the clan
bears the name of the animal.<note place='foot'>I. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane-en
Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland
Sumatra,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijks, Genootsch.</hi>, Tweede
Serie, dl. iii. Afdeeling: meer uitgebreide
artikelen, No. 2, p. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, dl. iv. No. 1, p. 8 sq.; Van Hoëvell,
<q>Iets over 't oorlogvoeren der Batta's,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indie</hi>,
N. S. vii. (1878) p. 434; G. A.
Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Over de verwantschap en het
huwelijks-en erfrecht bij de volken van
het maleische ras</hi>, pp. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 36; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Iets over de Papoewas van de Geelvunksbaai</hi>,
p. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (reprint from
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Ned.-Indië</hi>, 5<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Volgreeks
ii.); <hi rend='italic'>Journal Anthrop. Inst.</hi> ix. 295;
Backer, <hi rend='italic'>L'Archipel Indien</hi>, p. 470.</note> Thus the Battas have
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
totemism in full. But, further, each Batta believes
that he has seven or, on a more moderate computation,
three souls. One of these souls is always outside the
body, but nevertheless whenever it dies, however far
away it may be at the time, that same moment the
man dies also.<note place='foot'>B. Hagen, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
der Battareligion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>
xxviii. 514. J. B. Neumann
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> dl. iii. No. 2, p. 299) is the
authority for the seven souls.</note> The writer who mentions this belief
says nothing about the Batta totems; but on the
analogy of the Australian and Central American
evidence we can scarcely avoid concluding that the
external soul, whose death entails the death of the
man, must be housed in the totem animal or plant.
</p>

<p>
Against this view it can hardly be thought to militate
that the Batta does not in set terms affirm his
external soul to be in his totem, but alleges other,
though hardly contradictory, grounds for respecting
the sacred animal or plant of his clan. For if a savage
seriously believes that his life is bound up with an
external object, it is in the last degree unlikely that
he will let any stranger into the secret. In all that
touches his inmost life and beliefs the savage is exceedingly
suspicious and reserved; Europeans have resided
among savages for years without discovering some of
their capital articles of faith, and in the end the discovery
has often been the result of accident. Above
all, the savage lives in an intense and perpetual dread
of assassination by sorcery; the most trifling relics of
his person&mdash;the clippings of his hair and nails, his
spittle, the remnants of his food, his very name&mdash;all
these may, he fancies, be turned by the sorcerer to his
destruction, and he is therefore anxiously careful to
conceal or destroy them. But if in matters such as
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
these, which are but the outposts and outworks of his
life, he is shy and secretive to a degree, how close
must be the concealment, how impenetrable the reserve
in which he enshrouds the inner keep and citadel of
his being! When the princess in the fairy tale asks
the giant where he keeps his soul, he generally gives
false or evasive answers, and it is only after much
coaxing and wheedling that the secret is at last wrung
from him. In his jealous reticence the giant resembles
the timid and furtive savage; but whereas the
exigencies of the story demand that the giant should
at last reveal his secret, no such obligation is laid
on the savage; and no inducement that can be
offered is likely to tempt him to imperil his soul by
revealing its hiding-place to a stranger. It is therefore
no matter for surprise that the central mystery of
the savage's life should so long have remained a secret,
and that we should be left to piece it together from
scattered hints and fragments and from the recollections
of it which linger in fairy tales.
</p>

<p>
This view of totemism throws light on a class of
religious rites of which no adequate explanation, so far
as I am aware, has yet been offered. Amongst many
savage tribes, especially such as are known to practise
totemism, it is customary for lads at puberty to undergo
certain initiatory rites, of which one of the commonest
is a pretence of killing the lad and bringing him to life
again. Such rites become intelligible if we suppose
that their substance consists in extracting the youth's
soul in order to transfer it to his totem. For the
extraction of his soul would naturally be supposed to
kill the youth or, at least, to throw him into a death-like
trance, which the savage hardly distinguishes from
death. His recovery would then be attributed either
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
to the gradual recovery of his system from the violent
shock which it had received, or, more probably, to the
infusion into him of fresh life drawn from the totem.
Thus the essence of these initiatory rites, so far as
they consist in a simulation of death and resurrection,
would be an exchange of life or souls between the
man and his totem. The primitive belief in the possibility
of such an exchange of souls comes clearly out
in the story of the Basque hunter who affirmed that
he had been killed by a bear, but that the bear had,
after killing him, breathed its own soul into him, so
that the bear's body was now dead, but he himself was
a bear, being animated by the bear's soul.<note place='foot'>Th. Benfey, <hi rend='italic'>Pantschatantra</hi>, i. 128
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This
revival of the dead hunter as a bear is exactly analogous
to what, if I am right, is supposed to take place
in the totemistic ceremony of killing a lad at puberty
and bringing him to life again. The lad dies as a
man and comes to life again as an animal; the animal's
soul is now in him, and his human soul is in the
animal. With good right, therefore, does he call himself
a Bear or a Wolf, etc., according to his totem;
and with good right does he treat the bears or the
wolves, etc., as his brethren, since in these animals are
lodged the souls of himself and his kindred.
</p>

<p>
Examples of this supposed death and resurrection
at initiation are the following. Among some of the
Australian tribes of New South Wales, when lads are
initiated, it is thought that a being called Thuremlin
takes each lad to a distance, kills him, and sometimes
cuts him up, after which he restores him to life and
knocks out a tooth.<note place='foot'>A. L. P. Cameron, <q>Notes on
some Tribes of New South Wales,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Instit.</hi> xiv. 358.</note> In one part of Queensland the
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
humming sound of the Bullroarer, which is swung at
the initiatory rites, is said to be the noise made by the
wizards in swallowing the boys and bringing them up
again as young men. <q>The Ualaroi of the Upper
Darling River say that the boy meets a ghost which
kills him and brings him to life again as a man.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On Australian
Medicine Men,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi>
xvi. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the Bullroarer (a piece
of wood fastened to a cord or thong and
swung round so as to produce a booming
sound), see A. Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Custom and
Myth</hi>, p. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The religious use of
the Bullroarer is best known in Australia,
but in the essay just referred to
Mr. Andrew Lang has shown that
the instrument has been similarly
employed not only in South Africa
and by the Zunis of New Mexico, but
also by the ancient Greeks in their
religious mysteries. As a sacred instrument
it also occurs in Western
Africa (R. F. Burton, <hi rend='italic'>Abeokuta and the
Cameroons Mountains</hi>, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves</hi>, p. 124),
and in New Guinea (J. Chalmers,
<hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in New Guinea</hi>, p. 85).</note>
This resurrection appears to be represented at the
initiatory rites by the following ceremony. An old
man, disguised with stringy bark fibre, lies down in a
grave, and is lightly covered up with sticks and earth,
and as far as possible the natural appearance of the
ground is restored, the excavated earth being carried
away. The buried man holds a small bush in his
hand; it appears to be growing in the soil, and other
bushes are stuck in the soil to heighten the effect.
The novices are then brought to the edge of the grave,
and a song is sung, in which the only words used are
the <q>class-name</q> of the buried man and the word for
stringy bark fibre. Gradually, as the song continues,
the bush held by the buried man begins to quiver and
then to move more and more, and finally the man himself
starts up from the grave.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On some Australian
ceremonies of initiation,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiii. 453 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
<q>class-name</q> is the name of the
totemic division to which the man
belongs.</note> Similarly, Fijian lads
at initiation were shown a row of apparently dead men,
covered with blood, their bodies seemingly cut open,
and their entrails protruding. But at a yell from the
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
priest the pretended dead men sprang to their feet and
ran to the river to cleanse themselves from the blood
and entrails of pigs with which they had been besmeared.<note place='foot'>L. Fison, <q>The Nanga, or sacred
stone enclosure of Wainimala, Fiji,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiv. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the valley of the Congo initiatory rites of this
sort are common. In some places they are called
Ndembo. <q>In the practice of Ndembo the initiating
doctors get some one to fall down in a pretended fit,
and in that state he is carried away to an enclosed
place outside the town. This is called <q>dying Ndembo.</q>
Others follow suit, generally boys and girls, but often
young men and women.... They are supposed to
have died. But the parents and friends supply food,
and after a period varying, according to custom, from
three months to three years, it is arranged that the
doctor shall bring them to life again.... When the
doctor's fee has been paid, and money (goods) saved
for a feast, the <foreign rend='italic'>Ndembo</foreign> people are brought to life. At
first they pretend to know no one and nothing; they
do not even know how to masticate food, and friends
have to perform that office for them. They want
everything nice that any one uninitiated may have, and
beat them if it is not granted, or even strangle and kill
people. They do not get into trouble for this, because
it is thought that they do not know better. Sometimes
they carry on the pretence of talking gibberish,
and behaving as if they had returned from the spirit-world.
After this they are known by another name,
peculiar to those who have <q>died Ndembo.</q> ... We
hear of the custom far along on the upper river, as well
as in the cataract region.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Bentley, <hi rend='italic'>Life on the Congo</hi>
(London, 1887), p. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The following account of
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
the rites, as practised in this part of Africa, was given
to Bastian by an interpreter. <q>In the land of Ambamba
every one must die once, and when the fetish priest
shakes his calabash against a village, all the men and
lads whose hour is come fall into a state of lifeless
torpidity, from which they generally awake after three
days. But if the fetish loves a man he carries him
away into the bush and buries him in the fetish house,
often for many years. When he comes to life again,
he begins to eat and drink as before, but his understanding
is gone and the fetish man must teach him
and direct him in every motion, like the smallest child.
At first this can only be done with a stick, but gradually
his senses return, so that it is possible to talk with
him, and when his education is complete, the priest
brings him back to his parents. They would seldom
recognise their son but for the express assurances of
the fetish priest, who moreover recalls previous events
to their memory. He who has not gone through the
ceremony of the new birth in Ambamba is universally
looked down upon and is not admitted to the dances.</q>
During the period of initiation the novice is sympathetically
united to the fetish by which his life is
henceforward determined.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Ein Besuch in San
Salvador</hi>, pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> 86.</note> The novice, plunged in
the magic sleep or death-like trance within the sacred
hut, <q>beholds a bird or other object with which his
existence is thenceforward sympathetically bound up,
just as the life of the young Indian is bound up with
the animal which he sees in his dreams at puberty.</q><note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, ii. 183; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
pp. 15-18, 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On these initiatory
rites in the Congo region see also
H. H. Johnston in <hi rend='italic'>Proceed. Royal
Geogr. Soc.</hi> N. S. v. (1883) p. 572 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
and in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiii.
472; E. Delmar Morgan, in <hi rend='italic'>Proceed.
Royal Geogr. Soc.</hi> N. S. vi. 193.</note>
</p>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<p>
Rites of this sort were formerly observed in Quoja,
on the west coast of Africa, to the north of the Congo.
They are thus described by an old writer:&mdash;<q>They
have another ceremony which they call Belli-Paaro, but
it is not for everybody. For it is an incorporation in
the assembly of the spirits, and confers the right of
entering their groves, that is to say, of going and eating
the offerings which the simple folk bring thither.
The initiation or admission to the Belli-Paaro is
celebrated every twenty or twenty-five years. The
initiated recount marvels of the ceremony, saying that
they are roasted, that they entirely change their habits
and life, and that they receive a spirit quite different
from that of other people and quite new lights. The
badge of membership consists in some lines traced
on the neck between the shoulders; the lines seem to
be pricked with a needle. Those who have this mark
pass for persons of spirit, and when they have attained
a certain age they are allowed a voice in all public
assemblies; whereas the uninitiated are regarded as
profane, impure, and ignorant persons, who dare not
express an opinion on any subject of importance.
When the time for the ceremony has come, it is
celebrated as follows: By order of the king a place is
appointed in the forest, whither they bring the youths
who have not been marked, not without much crying
and weeping; for it is impressed upon the youths that
in order to undergo this change it is necessary to suffer
death. So they dispose of their property, as if it
were all over with them. There are always some of
the initiated beside the novices to instruct them.
They teach them to dance a certain dance called
<foreign rend='italic'>killing</foreign>, and to sing verses in praise of Belli. Above all,
they are very careful not to let them die of hunger,
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
because if they did so, it is much to be feared that the
spiritual resurrection would profit them nothing. This
manner of life lasts five or six years, and is comfortable
enough, for there is a village in the forest, and they
amuse themselves with hunting and fishing. Other
lads are brought thither from time to time, so that the
last comers have not long to stay. No woman or
uninitiated person is suffered to pass within four or five
leagues of the sacred wood. When their instruction is
completed, they are taken from the wood and shut up
in small huts made for the purpose. Here they begin
once more to hold communion with mankind and to
talk with the women who bring them their food. It
is amusing to see their affected simplicity. They pretend
to know no one, and to be ignorant of all the
customs of the country, such as the customs of washing
themselves, rubbing themselves with oil, etc. When
they enter these huts, their bodies are all covered with
the feathers of birds, and they wear caps of bark which
hang down before their faces. But after a time they
are dressed in clothes and taken to a great open place,
where all the people of the neighbourhood are
assembled. Here the novices give the first proof of
their capacity by dancing a dance which is called the
dance of Belli. After the dance is over, the novices
are taken to the houses of their parents by their
instructors.</q><note place='foot'>Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>, p. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Dapper's account has been
abbreviated in the text.</note>
</p>

<p>
Among the Indians of Virginia, an initiatory ceremony,
called <foreign rend='italic'>Huskanaw</foreign>, took place every sixteen
or twenty years, or oftener, as the young men
happened to grow up. The youths were kept in
solitary confinement in the woods for several months,
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
receiving no food but an infusion of some intoxicating
roots, so that they went raving mad, and continued in
this state eighteen or twenty days. <q>Upon this
occasion it is pretended that these poor creatures drink
so much of the water of Lethe that they perfectly lose
the remembrance of all former things, even of their
parents, their treasure, and their language. When the
doctors find that they have drank sufficiently of the
Wysoccan (so they call this mad potion), they gradually
restore them to their senses again by lessening the
intoxication of their diet; but before they are perfectly
well they bring them back into their towns, while they
are still wild and crazy through the violence of the
medicine. After this they are very fearful of discovering
anything of their former remembrance; for
if such a thing should happen to any of them, they
must immediately be <foreign rend='italic'>Huskanaw'd</foreign> again; and the
second time the usage is so severe that seldom any
one escapes with life. Thus they must pretend to
have forgot the very use of their tongues, so as not
to be able to speak, nor understand anything that is
spoken, till they learn it again. Now, whether this be
real or counterfeit, I don't know; but certain it is that
they will not for some time take notice of any body
nor any thing with which they were before acquainted,
being still under the guard of their keepers, who
constantly wait upon them everywhere till they have
learnt all things perfectly over again. Thus they
unlive their former lives, and commence men by
forgetting that they ever have been boys.</q><note place='foot'>(Beverley's) <hi rend='italic'>History of Virginia</hi> (London, 1722), p. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Among some of the Indian tribes of North America
there are certain religious associations which are only
open to candidates who have gone through a pretence
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
of being killed and brought to life again. Captain
Carver witnessed the admission of a candidate to an
association called <q>the friendly society of the Spirit</q>
among the Naudowessies. The candidate knelt
before the chief, who told him that <q>he himself
was now agitated by the same spirit which he should
in a few moments communicate to him; that it would
strike him dead, but that he would instantly be restored
again to life.... As he spoke this, he appeared
to be greatly agitated, till at last his emotions became so
violent that his countenance was distorted and his whole
frame convulsed. At this juncture he threw something
that appeared both in shape and colour like a small
bean at the young man, which seemed to enter his
mouth, and he instantly fell as motionless as if he had
been shot.</q> For a time the man lay like dead, but
under a shower of blows he showed signs of consciousness,
and finally, discharging from his mouth the bean,
or whatever it was the chief had thrown at him, he
came to life.<note place='foot'>J. Carver, <hi rend='italic'>Travels through the Interior Parts of North America</hi>, pp.
271-275.</note> In other tribes the instrument by which
the candidate is apparently slain is the medicine-bag.
The bag is made of the skin of an animal (such as the
otter, wild cat, serpent, bear, raccoon, wolf, owl, weasel),
of which it roughly preserves the shape. Each member
of the society has one of these bags, in which he
keeps the odds and ends that make up his <q>medicine</q>
or charms. <q>They believe that from the miscellaneous
contents in the belly of the skin bag or animal there
issues a spirit or breath, which has the power, not only
to knock down and kill a man, but also to set him up
and restore him to life.</q> The mode of killing a man
with one of these medicine-bags is to thrust it at him;
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
he falls like dead, but a second thrust of the bag
restores him to life.<note place='foot'>Carver, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 277 sq.; Schoolcraft,
<hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, iii. 287, v. 430
sqq.; Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Kitschi-Gami</hi>, i. 64-70.</note>
</p>

<p>
A ceremony witnessed by Jewitt during his
captivity among the Indians of Nootka Sound doubtless
belongs to this class of customs. The Indian
king or chief <q>discharged a pistol close to his son's
ear, who immediately fell down as if killed, upon
which all the women of the house set up a most
lamentable cry, tearing handfuls of hair from their
heads, and exclaiming that the prince was dead; at the
same time a great number of the inhabitants rushed
into the house armed with their daggers, muskets, etc.,
inquiring the cause of their outcry. These were immediately
followed by two others dressed in wolf skins,
with masks over their faces representing the head of
that animal. The latter came in on their hands and
feet in the manner of a beast, and taking up the prince,
carried him off upon their backs, retiring in the same
manner as they entered.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Adventures and
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</hi> (Middletown,
1820), p. 119.</note> In another place Jewitt
mentions that the young prince&mdash;a lad of about eleven
years of age&mdash;wore a mask in imitation of a wolf's
head.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, p. 44. For the age of the
prince, see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p. 35.</note> Now, as the Indians of this part of America
are divided into totem clans, of which the Wolf clan is
one of the principal, and as the members of each clan
are in the habit of wearing some portion of the totem
animal about their person,<note place='foot'>Holmberg, <q>Ueber die Völker des
russischen Amerika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Acta Soc. Scient.
Fennicae</hi>, iv. (Helsingfors, 1856) pp.
292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 328; Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the
Population, etc. of Alaska</hi>, p. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
A. Krause, Die <hi rend='italic'>Tlinkit-Indianer</hi>, p.
112; R. C. Mayne, <hi rend='italic'>Four years in
British Columbia and Vancouver Island</hi>,
p. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 268.</note> it is probable that the
prince belonged to the Wolf clan, and that the
ceremony described by Jewitt represented the killing
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
of the lad in order that he might be born anew as a
wolf, much in the same way that the Basque hunter
supposed himself to have been killed and to have come
to life again as a bear. The Toukaway Indians of
Texas, one of whose totems is the wolf, have a
ceremony in which men, dressed in wolf skins, run
about on all fours, howling and mimicking wolves.
At last they scratch up a living tribesman, who has
been buried on purpose, and putting a bow and arrows
in his hands, bid him do as the wolves do&mdash;rob, kill,
and murder.<note place='foot'>Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>, v. 683.
In a letter dated 16th Dec. 1887, Mr.
A. S. Gatschet, of the Bureau of
Ethnology, Washington, writes to me:
<q>Among the Toukawe whom in 1884
I found at Fort Griffin [?], Texas, I
noticed that they never kill the big or
gray wolf, <foreign rend='italic'>hatchukunän</foreign>, which has a
mythological signification, <q>holding the
earth</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>hatch</foreign>). He forms one of their
totem clans, and they have had a dance
in his honor, danced by the males only,
who carried sticks.</q></note> The ceremony probably forms part of
an initiatory rite like the resurrection from the grave
of the old man in the Australian rites.
</p>

<p>
The people of Rook, an island east of New
Guinea, hold festivals at which one or two disguised
men, their heads covered with wooden masks, go
dancing through the village, followed by all the other
men. They demand that the circumcised boys who
have not yet been swallowed by Marsaba (the devil)
shall be given up to them. The boys, trembling and
shrieking, are delivered to them, and must creep between
the legs of the disguised men. Then the procession
moves through the village again, and announces
that Marsaba has eaten up the boys, and will not disgorge
them till he receives a present of pigs, taro, etc.
So all the villagers, according to their means, contribute
provisions, which are then consumed in the name
of Marsaba.<note place='foot'>Reina, <q>Ueber die Bewohner der
Insel Rook,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für allgemeine
Erdkunde</hi>, N. F. iv. (1858) p. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In New Britain all males are members
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
of an association called the Duk-duk. The boys are
admitted to it very young, but are not fully initiated
till their fourteenth year, when they receive from the
Tubuvan a terrible blow with a cane, which is supposed
to kill them. The Tubuvan and the Duk-duk
are two disguised men who represent cassowaries.
They dance with a short hopping step in imitation of
the cassowary. Each of them wears a huge hat like
an extinguisher, woven of grass or palm-fibres; it is
six feet high, and descends to the wearer's shoulders,
completely concealing his head and face. From the
neck to the knees the man's body is hidden by a crinoline
made of the leaves of a certain tree fastened on
hoops, one above the other. The Tubuvan is regarded
as a female, the Duk-duk as a male. No woman may
see these disguised men. The institution of the Duk-duk
is common to the neighbouring islands of New
Ireland and the Duke of York.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Im Bismarck
Archipel</hi>, pp. 129-134; Rev. G.
Brown, <q>Notes on the Duke of York
Group, New Britain, and New Ireland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Royal Geogr. Soc.</hi> xlvii.
(1878) p. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H. Romilly,
<q>The Islands of the New Britain
Group,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceed. Royal Geogr. Soc.</hi>
N. S. ix. (1887) p. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Rev. G.
Brown, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p. 17; W. Powell, <hi rend='italic'>Wanderings
in a Wild Country</hi>, pp. 60-66;
C. Hager, <hi rend='italic'>Kaiser Wilhelm's Land und
der Bismarck Archipel</hi>, pp. 115-128.
The inhabitants of these islands are
divided into two exogamous classes,
which in the Duke of York Island have
two insects for their totems. One of
the insects is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mantis religiosus</foreign>; the
other is an insect that mimicks the leaf
of the horse-chestnut tree very closely.
Rev. B. Danks, <q>Marriage customs of
the New Britain Group,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop.
Inst.</hi> xviii. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst the Galela and Tobelorese of Halmahera,
an island to the west of New Guinea, boys go through
a form of initiation, part of which seems to consist in a
pretence of begetting them anew. When a number of
boys have reached the proper age, their parents agree
to celebrate the ceremony at their common expense,
and they invite others to be present at it. A shed is
erected, and two long tables are placed in it, with
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
benches to match, one for the men and one for the
women. When all the preparations have been made
for a feast, a great many skins of the rayfish, and
some pieces of a wood which imparts a red colour to
water, are taken to the shed. A priest or elder causes
a vessel to be placed in the sight of all the people, and
then begins, with significant gestures, to rub a piece of
the wood with the ray-skin. The powder so produced
is put in the vessel, and at the same time the name of
one of the boys is called out. The same proceeding
is repeated for each boy. Then the vessels are filled
with water, after which the feast begins. At the third
cock-crow the priest smears the faces and bodies of the
boys with the red water, which represents the blood shed
at the perforation of the <emph>hymen</emph>. Towards daybreak
the boys are taken to the wood, and must hide behind
the largest trees. The men, armed with sword and
shield, accompany them, dancing and singing. The
priest knocks thrice on each of the trees behind which
a boy is hiding. All day the boys stay in the wood,
exposing themselves to the heat of the sun as much as
possible. In the evening they bathe and return to the
shed, where the women supply them with food.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>Galela und Tobeloresen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift f. Ethnologie</hi>, xvii.
(1885) p. 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the west of Ceram boys at puberty are admitted
to the Kakian association.<note place='foot'>The Kakian association and its
initiatory ceremonies have often been
described. See Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en
nieuw Oost-Indiën</hi>, iii. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Von
Schmid, <q>Het Kakihansch Verbond
op het eiland Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift v.
Neêrlands Indië</hi>, v. dl. ii. (1843) 25-38;
Van Ekris, <q>HetCeramsche
Kakianverbond,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederland. Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
(1865) ix. 205-226 (repeated
with slight changes in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift v.
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xvi. 1866, pp. 290-315); F. Fournier,
<q>De Zuidkust van Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
v. Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xvi. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Van Rees, <hi rend='italic'>Die Pionniers
der Beschaving in Neêrlands
Indië</hi>, pp. 92-106; Van Hoëvell,
<hi rend='italic'>Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk de Oeliasers</hi>,
p. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Schulze, <q>Ueber Ceram
und seine Bewohner,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandl. d.
Berliner Gesell. f. Anthropologie</hi>, etc.
(1877) p. 117; W. Joest, <q>Beiträge
zur Kenntniss der Eingebornen der
Insel Formosa und Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> (1882),
p. 64; Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische
Archipel</hi>, p. 318; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>,
i. 145-148; Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>,
pp. 107-111. The best accounts are
those of Valentyn, Von Schmid, Van
Ekris, Van Rees, and Riedel, which
are accordingly followed in the text.</note> Modern writers
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
have commonly regarded this association as primarily
a political league instituted to resist foreign domination.
In reality its objects are purely religious and
social, though it is possible that the priests may have
occasionally used their powerful influence for political
ends. The society is in fact merely one of those
widely-diffused primitive institutions, of which a chief
object is the initiation of young men. In recent years
the true nature of the association has been duly recognised
by the distinguished Dutch ethnologist, J. G. F.
Riedel. The Kakian house is an oblong wooden
shed, situated under the darkest trees in the depth of
the forest, and is built to admit so little light that it is
impossible to see what goes on in it. Every village
has such a house. Thither the boys who are to be
initiated are conducted blindfolded, followed by their
parents and relations. Each boy is led by the hand
by two men, who act as his sponsors or guardians,
looking after him during the period of initiation.
When all are assembled before the shed, the high
priest calls aloud upon the devils. Immediately a
hideous uproar is heard to proceed from the shed. It
is made by men with bamboo trumpets, who have been
secretly introduced into the building by a back door,
but the women and children think it is made by the
devils, and are much terrified. Then the priests enter
the shed, followed by the boys, one at a time. As
soon as each boy has disappeared within the precincts,
a dull chopping sound is heard, a fearful cry rings out,
and a sword or spear, dripping with blood, is thrust
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
through the roof of the shed. This is a token that the
boy's head has been cut off, and that the devil has
carried him away to the other world, there to regenerate
and transform him. So at sight of the bloody
sword the mothers weep and wail, crying that the
devil has murdered their children. In some places, it
would seem, the boys are pushed through an opening
made in the shape of a crocodile's jaws or a cassowary's
beak, and it is then said that the devil has swallowed
them. The boys remain in the shed for five or nine
days. Sitting in the dark, they hear the blast of the
bamboo trumpets, and from time to time the sound of
musket shots and the clash of swords. Every day
they bathe, and their faces and bodies are smeared
with a yellow dye, to give them the appearance of
having been swallowed by the devil. During his stay
in the Kakian house each boy has one or two crosses
tattooed with thorns on his breast or arm. When they
are not sleeping, the lads must sit in a crouching posture
without moving a muscle. As they sit in a row
cross-legged, with their hands stretched out, the chief
takes his trumpet, and placing the mouth of it on the
hands of each lad, speaks through it in strange tones,
imitating the voice of the spirits. He warns the lads,
under pain of death, to observe the rules of the Kakian
society, and never to reveal what has passed in the
Kakian house. The novices are also told by the
priests to behave well to their blood relations, and are
taught the traditions and secrets of the tribe.
</p>

<p>
Meantime the mothers and sisters of the lads have
gone home to weep and mourn. But in a day or two
the men who acted as guardians or sponsors to the
novices return to the village with the glad tidings that
the devil, at the intercession of the priests, has restored
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
the lads to life. The men who bring this news come
in a fainting state and daubed with mud, like messengers
freshly arrived from the nether world. Before
leaving the Kakian house, each lad receives from the
priest a stick adorned at both ends with cock's or
cassowary's feathers. The sticks are supposed to have
been given to the lads by the devil at the time when
he restored them to life, and they serve as a token that
the lads have been in the spirit-land. When they
return to their homes they totter in their walk, and
enter the house backward, as if they had forgotten how
to walk properly; or they enter the house by the back
door. If a plate of food is given to them, they hold it
upside down. They remain dumb, indicating their
wants by signs only. All this is to show that they are
still under the influence of the devil or the spirits.
Their sponsors have to teach them all the common
acts of life, as if they were new-born children.
Further, upon leaving the Kakian house the boys are
strictly forbidden to eat of certain fruits until the next
celebration of the rites has taken place. And for
twenty or thirty days their hair may not be combed by
their mothers or sisters. At the end of that time the
high priest takes them to a lonely place in the forest,
and cuts off a lock of hair from the crown of each of
their heads. After these initiatory rites the lads are
deemed men, and may marry; it would be a scandal if
they married before.
</p>

<p>
The simulation of death and resurrection or of a
new birth at initiation appears to have lingered on, or
at least to have left traces of itself, among peoples who
have advanced far beyond the stage of savagery. Thus,
after his investiture with the sacred thread&mdash;the
symbol of his order&mdash;a Brahman is called <q>twice-born.</q>
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
Manu says, <q>According to the injunction of
the revealed texts the first birth of an Aryan is from
his natural mother, the second happens on the tying
of the girdle of Muñga grass, and the third on the
initiation to the performance of a Srauta sacrifice.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Laws of Manu</hi>, ii. 169, trans. by
Bühler; Dubois, <hi rend='italic'>Moeurs, Institutions
et Cérémonies des Peuples de l'Inde</hi>, i.
125; Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Life
and Thought in India</hi>, pp. 360 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
A pretence of killing the candidate appears to have
formed part of the initiation to the Mithraic mysteries.<note place='foot'>Lampridius, <hi rend='italic'>Commodus</hi>, 9; C.
W. King, <hi rend='italic'>The Gnostics and their
Remains</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 127, 129.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus, if I am right, wherever totemism is found,
and wherever a pretence is made of killing and bringing
to life again at initiation, there must exist or have
existed not only a belief in the possibility of permanently
depositing the soul in some external object&mdash;animal,
plant, or what not&mdash;but an actual intention of
so depositing it. If the question is put, why do men
desire to deposit their life outside their bodies? the
answer can only be that, like the giant in the fairy tale,
they think it safer to do so than to carry it about with
them, just as people deposit their money with a banker
rather than carry it on their persons. We have seen
that at critical periods the life or soul is sometimes
temporarily deposited in a safe place till the danger is
past. But institutions like totemism are not resorted
to merely on special occasions of danger; they are
systems into which every one, or at least every male,
is obliged to be initiated at a certain period of life.
Now the period of life at which initiation takes place
is regularly puberty; and this fact suggests that the
special danger which totemism and systems like it are
intended to obviate is supposed not to arise till sexual
maturity has been attained, in fact, that the danger
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
apprehended is believed to attend the relation of the
sexes to each other. It would be easy to prove by
a long array of facts that the sexual relation is
associated in the primitive mind with many supernatural
perils; but the exact nature of the danger
apprehended is still obscure. We may hope that a
more exact acquaintance with savage modes of thought
will in time disclose this central mystery of primitive
society, and will thereby furnish the clue, not only to the
social aspect of totemism (the prohibition of sexual
union between persons of the same totem), but to the
origin of the marriage system.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Conclusion.'/>
<head>§ 5.&mdash;Conclusion.</head>

<p>
Thus the view that Balder's life was in the mistletoe
is entirely in harmony with primitive modes of thought.
It may indeed sound like a contradiction that, if his life
was in the mistletoe, he should nevertheless have been
killed by a blow from it. But when a person's life is
conceived as embodied in a particular object, with the
existence of which his own existence is inseparably
bound up, and the destruction of which involves his
own, the object in question may be regarded and
spoken of indifferently as the person's life or as his
death, as happens in the fairy tales. Hence if a man's
death is in an object, it is perfectly natural that he
should be killed by a blow from it. In the fairy tales
Koshchei the Deathless is killed by a blow from the
egg or the stone in which his life or death is;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>.</note> the
ogres burst when a certain grain of sand&mdash;doubtless
containing their life or death&mdash;is carried over their
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
heads;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> the magician dies when the stone in which his
life or death is contained is put under his pillow;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and
the Tartar hero is warned that he may be killed by the
golden arrow or golden sword in which his soul has
been stowed away.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the myth the
throwing of the weapons and of the
mistletoe at Balder and the blindness of
Hödur who slew him remind us of the
custom of the Irish reapers who kill the
corn-spirit in the last sheaf by throwing
their sickles blindfold at it. (See above,
vol. i. p. 339). In Mecklenburg a cock
is sometimes buried in the ground and
a man who is blindfolded strikes at it
with a flail. If he misses it, another
tries, and so on till the cock is killed.
Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche
aus Mecklenburg</hi>, ii. 280. In
England on Shrove Tuesday a hen
used to be tied upon a man's back, and
other men blindfolded struck at it with
branches till they killed it. Dyer,
<hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi>, p. 68.
Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 16
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) has made it probable that such
sports are directly derived from the
custom of killing a cock upon the
harvest-field as a representative of the
corn-spirit (see above, p. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>). These
customs, therefore, combined with the
blindness of Hödur in the myth suggest
that the man who killed the human
representative of the oak-spirit was
blindfolded, and threw his weapon or
the mistletoe from a little distance.
After the Lapps had killed a bear&mdash;which
was the occasion of many
superstitious ceremonies&mdash;the bear's
skin was hung on a post, and the
women, blindfolded, shot arrows at
it. Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi>, p. 240.</note>
</p>

<p>
The idea that the life of the oak was in the mistletoe
was probably suggested, as I have said, by the observation
that in winter the mistletoe growing on the oak
remains green, while the oak itself is leafless. But the
position of the plant&mdash;growing, not from the ground,
but from the trunk or branches of the tree&mdash;might
confirm this idea. Primitive man might think that,
like himself, the oak-spirit had sought to deposit his
life in some safe place, and for this purpose had pitched
on the mistletoe, which, being in a sense neither on
earth nor in heaven, was as secure a place as could be
found. At the beginning of this chapter we saw that
primitive man seeks to preserve the life of his human
divinities by keeping them in a sort of intermediate
position between earth and heaven, as the place where
they are least likely to be assailed by the dangers that
encompass the life of man on earth. We can therefore
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
understand why in modern folk-medicine the
mistletoe is not allowed to touch the ground; if it
touches the ground, its healing virtue is supposed to
be gone.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
1001, 1010.</note> This may be a survival of the old superstition
that the plant in which the life of the sacred tree
was concentrated should not be exposed to the risk
incurred by contact with the ground. In an Indian
legend, which offers a parallel to the Balder myth, Indra
promised the demon Namuci not to kill him by day or
by night, nor with what was wet or what was dry. But
he killed him in the morning twilight by sprinkling
over him the foam of the sea.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. 61.</note> The foam of the sea
is just such an object as a savage might choose to put
his life in, because it occupies that sort of intermediate
or nondescript position between earth and sky or sea
and sky in which primitive man sees safety. It is
therefore not surprising that the foam of the river
should be the totem of a clan in India.<note place='foot'>Col. E. T. Dalton, <q>The Kols of
Chota-Nagpore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Trans. Ethnol. Soc.</hi>
vi. 36.</note> Again, the
view that the mistletoe owes its mystic character partly
to the fact of its not growing on the ground is confirmed
by a parallel superstition about the mountain-ash or
rowan-tree. In Jutland a rowan that is found growing
out of the top of another tree is esteemed <q>exceedingly
effective against witchcraft: since it does not grow on
the ground witches have no power over it; if it is to
have its full effect it must be cut on Ascension Day.</q><note place='foot'>Jens Kamp, <hi rend='italic'>Danske Folkeminder</hi>
(Odense, 1877), pp. 172, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> referred
to in Feilberg's <hi rend='italic'>Bidrag til en Ordbog
over Jyske Almuesmål</hi>, Fjerde hefte
(Copenhagen, 1888), p. 320. For a
sight of Feilberg's work I am indebted
to the kindness of the Rev. Walter
Gregor, M.A., Pitsligo, who pointed
out the passage to me.</note>
Hence it is placed over doors to prevent the ingress of
witches.<note place='foot'>E. T. Kristensen, <hi rend='italic'>Iydske Folkeminder</hi>,
vi. 380, referred to by
Feilberg, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Similarly the mistletoe in Germany is still
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
universally considered a protection against witchcraft,
and in Sweden, as we saw, the mistletoe which is
gathered on Midsummer Eve is attached to the ceiling
of the house, the horse stall, or the cow's crib, in the
belief that this renders the Troll powerless to injure
man or beast.<note place='foot'>Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
§ 128; L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life
in Sweden</hi>, p. 269.</note>
</p>

<p>
The view that the mistletoe was not merely the
instrument of Balder's death, but that it contained his
life, is countenanced by the analogy of a Scottish
superstition. Tradition ran that the fate of the family
of Hay was bound up with the mistletoe of a certain
oak.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>While the mistletoe bats on Errol's oak,</q></l>
<l>And that oak stands fast,</l>
<l>The Hays shall flourish, and their good gray hawk</l>
<l>Shall not flinch before the blast.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>But when the root of the oak decays,</q></l>
<l>And the mistletoe dwines on its withered breast,</l>
<l>The grass shall grow on the Earl's hearthstone,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And the corbies craw in the falcon's nest.</q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
<q>A large oak with the mistletoe growing on it was
long pointed out as the tree referred to. A piece of
the mistletoe cut by a Hay was believed to have
magical virtues. <q>The oak is gone and the estate is
lost to the family,</q> as a local historian says.</q><note place='foot'>Extract from a newspaper, copied
and sent to me by the Rev. Walter
Gregor, M.A., Pitsligo. Mr. Gregor
does not mention the name of the
newspaper.</note> The
idea that the fate of a family, as distinct from the lives
of its members, is bound up with a particular plant or
tree, is no doubt comparatively modern. The older
view probably was that the lives of all the Hays were
in this particular mistletoe, just as in the Indian story
the lives of all the ogres are in a lemon; to break a
twig of the mistletoe would then have been to kill one
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
of the Hays. Similarly in the island of Rum, whose
bold mountains the voyager from Oban to Skye
observes to seaward, it was thought that if one of
the family of Lachlin shot a deer on the mountain of
Finchra, he would die suddenly or contract a distemper
which would soon prove fatal.<note place='foot'>Martin, <q>Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii.
661</note> Probably the
life of the Lachlins was bound up with the deer on
Finchra, as the life of the Hays was bound up with
the mistletoe on Errol's oak.
</p>

<p>
It is not a new opinion that the Golden Bough
was the mistletoe.<note place='foot'>Rochholz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und
Brauch</hi>, i. 9.</note> True, Virgil does not identify but
only compares it with the mistletoe. But this may be
only a poetical device to cast a mystic glamour over
the humble plant. Or, more probably, his description
was based on a popular superstition that at certain
times the mistletoe blazed out into a supernatural golden
glory. The poet tells how two doves, guiding Aeneas
to the gloomy vale in whose depth grew the Golden
Bough, alighted upon a tree, <q>whence shone a
flickering gleam of gold. As in the woods in winter
cold the mistletoe&mdash;a plant not native to its tree&mdash;is
green with fresh leaves and twines its yellow berries
about the boles; such seemed upon the shady oak the
leafy gold, so rustled in the gentle breeze the golden
leaf.</q><note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, cp. 136
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> On the mistletoe (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>viscum</foreign>) see
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 245 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Here Virgil definitely describes the Golden
Bough as growing on an oak, and compares it with the
mistletoe. The inference is almost inevitable that the
Golden Bough was nothing but the mistletoe seen
through the haze of poetry or of popular superstition.
</p>

<p>
Now grounds have been shown for believing that
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
the priest of the Arician grove&mdash;the King of the
Wood&mdash;personified the tree on which grew the Golden
Bough.<note place='foot'>Virgil (Aen. vi. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) places
the Golden Bough in the neighbourhood
of Lake Avernus. But this was probably
a poetical liberty, adopted for the
convenience of Aeneas's descent to the
infernal world. Italian tradition, as we
learn from Servius, placed the Golden
Bough in the grove at Nemi.</note> Hence, if that tree was the oak, the King of
the Wood must have been a personification of the oak-spirit.
It is, therefore, easy to understand why, before
he could be slain, it was necessary to break the Golden
Bough. As an oak-spirit, his life or death was in the
mistletoe on the oak, and so long as the mistletoe remained
intact, he, like Balder, could not die. To slay
him, therefore, it was necessary to break the mistletoe,
and probably, as in the case of Balder, to throw it at
him. And to complete the parallel, it is only necessary
to suppose that the King of the Wood was formerly
burned, dead or alive, at the midsummer fire festival
which, as we have seen, was annually celebrated in the
Arician grove.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The perpetual fire which burned in
the grove, like the perpetual fire under the oak at
Romove, was probably fed with the sacred oak-wood;
and thus it would be in a great fire of oak that the King
of the Wood formerly met his end. At a later time,
as I have suggested, his annual tenure of office was
lengthened or shortened, as the case might be, by the
rule which allowed him to live so long as he could
prove his divine right by the strong hand. But he
only escaped the fire to fall by the sword.
</p>

<p>
Thus it seems that at a remote age in the heart of
Italy, beside the sweet lake of Nemi, the same fiery
tragedy was annually enacted which Italian merchants
and soldiers were afterwards to witness among their
rude kindred, the Celts of Gaul, and which, if the
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
Roman eagles had ever swooped on Norway, might
have been found repeated with little difference among
the barbarous Aryans of the North. The rite was
probably an essential feature in the primitive Aryan
worship of the oak.<note place='foot'>A custom of annually burning a
human representative of the corn-spirit
has been noted among the Egyptians,
Pawnees, and Khonds. See above, vol.
i. pp. 382, 387, 401 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In Semitic
lands there are traces of a practice of
annually burning a human god. For the
image of Hercules (that is, of Baal)
which was periodically burned on a pyre
at Tarsus, must have been a substitute
for a human representative of the god.
See Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> 33, vol. ii.
p. 16, ed. Dindorf; W. R. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The
Religion of the Semites</hi>, i. 353 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
Druids seem to have eaten portions of
the human victim. Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xxx. § 13. Perhaps portions of the flesh
of the King of the Wood were eaten by
his worshippers as a sacrament. We
have seen traces of the use of sacramental
bread at Nemi. See above, p. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
It only remains to ask, Why was the mistletoe
called the Golden Bough? The name was not simply a
poet's fancy, nor even peculiarly Italian; for in Welsh
also the mistletoe is known as <q>the tree of pure gold.</q><note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>, ii.
1009, <foreign rend='italic'>pren puraur</foreign>.</note>
The whitish-yellow of the mistletoe berries is hardly
enough to account for the name. For Virgil says that
the Bough was altogether golden, stem as well as
leaves,<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and the same is implied in the Welsh name,
<q>the tree of pure gold.</q> A clue to the real meaning
of the name is furnished by the mythical fern-seed or
fern-bloom.
</p>

<p>
We saw that fern-seed is popularly supposed to
bloom like gold or fire on Midsummer Eve. Thus
in Bohemia it is said that <q>on St. John's Day fern-seed
blooms with golden blossoms that gleam like
fire.</q><note place='foot'>Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und Gebräuche
aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>, § 673.</note> Now it is a property of this mythical fern-seed
that whoever has it, or will ascend a mountain
holding it in his hand on Midsummer Eve, will discover
a vein of gold or will see the treasures of the earth
shining with a bluish flame.<note place='foot'>Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> § 676; Wuttke,
<hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>, § 123.</note> And if you place fern-seed
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
among money, the money will never decrease,
however much of it you spend.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zingerle, Sitten, Bräuche und
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> §
882.</note> Sometimes the
fern-seed is supposed to bloom at Christmas, and
whoever catches it will become very rich.<note place='foot'>Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> § 1573.</note> Thus, on
the principle of like by like, fern-seed is supposed to
discover gold because it is itself golden; and for a
similar reason it enriches its possessor with an unfailing
supply of gold. But while the fern-seed is
described as golden, it is equally described as glowing
and fiery.<note place='foot'>Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> § 675;
Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>,
p. 98.</note> Hence, when we consider that two great
days for gathering the fabulous seed are Midsummer
Eve and Christmas&mdash;that is, the two solstices (for
Christmas is nothing but an old heathen celebration of
the winter solstice)&mdash;we are led to regard the fiery
aspect of the fern-seed as primary, and its golden
aspect as secondary and derivative. Fern-seed, in
fact, would seem to be an emanation of the sun's fire
at the two turning-points of its course, the summer
and winter solstices. This view is confirmed by a
German story in which a hunter is said to have
procured fern-seed by shooting at the sun on Midsummer
Day at noon; three drops of blood fell
down, which he caught in a white cloth, and these
blood-drops were the fern-seed.<note place='foot'>L. Bechstein, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsches Sagenbuch</hi>
No. 500; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Thüringer Sagenbuch</hi>
(Leipzig, 1885), ii. No. 161.</note> Here the blood
is clearly the blood of the sun, from which the fern-seed
is thus directly derived. Thus it may be
taken as certain that fern-seed is golden, because
it is believed to be an emanation of the sun's golden
fire.
</p>

<p>
Now, like fern-seed, the mistletoe is gathered
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
either at Midsummer or Christmas<note place='foot'>For gathering it at midsummer,
see above, p. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>. The custom of
gathering it at Christmas still survives
among ourselves. At York <q>on the
eve of Christmas Day they carry
mistletoe to the high altar of the
cathedral, and proclaim a public and
universal liberty, pardon, and freedom
to all sorts of inferior and even wicked
people at the gates of the city, towards
the four quarters of heaven.</q> Stukeley,
<hi rend='italic'>Medallic History of Carausius</hi>, quoted
by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i. 525.
This last custom is of course now
obsolete.</note>&mdash;that is, at the
summer and winter solstices&mdash;and, like fern-seed, it
is supposed to possess the power of revealing treasures
in the earth. On Midsummer Eve people in Sweden
make divining-rods of mistletoe or of four different
kinds of wood, one of which must be mistletoe. The
treasure-seeker places the rod on the ground after sundown,
and when it rests directly over treasure, the rod
begins to move as if it were alive.<note place='foot'>Afzelius, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen und Volkslieder
aus Schwedens älterer und neuerer
Zeit</hi>, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> iii. 289; L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant
Life in Sweden</hi>, p. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now, if the
mistletoe discovers gold, it must be in its character
of the Golden Bough; and if it is gathered at the solstices,
must not the Golden Bough, like the golden fern-seed,
be an emanation of the sun's fire? The question
cannot be answered with a simple affirmative. We
have seen that the primitive Aryans probably kindled
the midsummer bonfires as sun-charms, that is, with
the intention of supplying the sun with fresh fire. But
as this fire was always elicited by the friction of oak
wood,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>.</note> it must have appeared to the primitive Aryan
that the sun was periodically recruited from the fire
which resided in the sacred oak. In other words, the
oak must have seemed to him the original storehouse
or reservoir of the fire which was from time to time
drawn out to feed the sun. But the life of the oak
was conceived to be in the mistletoe; therefore the
mistletoe must have contained the seed or germ of the
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
fire which was elicited by friction from the wood of the
oak. Thus, instead of saying that the mistletoe was
an emanation of the sun's fire, it would be more
correct to say that the sun's fire was regarded as an
emanation of the mistletoe. No wonder, then, that
the mistletoe shone with a golden splendour, and was
called the Golden Bough. Probably, however, like
fern-seed, it was thought to assume its golden aspect
only at those stated times, especially midsummer,
when fire was drawn from the oak to light up the
sun.<note place='foot'>Fern-seed is supposed to bloom at
Easter as well as at midsummer and
Christmas (Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>); and Easter, as we
have seen, is one of the times when sun-fires
are kindled.</note> At Pulverbatch, in Shropshire, it was believed
within living memory that the oak-tree blooms on Midsummer
Eve and the blossom withers before daylight.<note place='foot'>Burne and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire
Folk-lore</hi>, p. 242.</note>
This fleeting bloom of the oak, if I am right, could
originally have been nothing but the mistletoe in its
character of the Golden Bough. As Shropshire
borders on Wales, the superstition may be Welsh in
its immediate origin, though probably the belief is a
fragment of the primitive Aryan creed. In some
parts of Italy, as we saw,<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>.</note> peasants still go out on
Midsummer morning to search the oak-trees for the
<q>oil of St. John,</q> which, like the mistletoe, heals all
wounds, and is doubtless the mistletoe itself in its
glorified aspect. Thus it is easy to understand how a
title like the Golden Bough or the <q>tree of pure gold,</q>
so little descriptive of the real appearance of the plant,
should have held its ground as a name for the mistletoe
in Italy and Wales, and probably in other parts of the
Aryan world.<note place='foot'><p>The reason why Virgil represents
Aeneas as taking the mistletoe with
him to Hades is perhaps that the
mistletoe was supposed to repel evil
spirits (see above, p. <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>). Hence
when Charon is disposed to bluster at
Aeneas, the sight of the Golden Bough
quiets him (<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 406 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) Perhaps
also the power ascribed to the mistletoe
of laying bare the secrets of the earth
may have suggested its use as a kind of
<q>open Sesame</q> to the lower world.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sed non ante datur telluris operta subire,<lb/>
Auricomos quam qui decerpserit arbore fetus.</foreign></q></p></note>
</p>

<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>

<p>
Now, too, we can fully understand why Virbius
came to be confounded with the sun. If Virbius was,
as I have tried to show, a tree-spirit, he must have
been the spirit of the oak on which grew the Golden
Bough; for tradition represented him as the first of
the Kings of the Wood. As an oak-spirit he must
have been supposed periodically to rekindle the sun's
fire, and might therefore easily be confounded with
the sun itself. Similarly we can explain why Balder,
an oak-spirit, was described as <q>so fair of face and so
shining that a light went forth from him,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Edda</hi>, übersetzt von K.
Simrock,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi> p. 264.</note> and why he
should have been so often taken to be the sun. And
in general we may say that in primitive society, when
the only known way of making fire is by the friction of
wood, the savage must necessarily conceive fire as a
property stored away, like sap or juice, in trees, from
which he has laboriously to extract it. Thus all trees,
or at least the particular sorts of trees whose wood he
employs in fire-making, must be regarded by him as
reservoirs of hidden fire, and it is natural that he
should describe them by epithets like golden, shining, or
bright. May not this have been the origin of the name,
<q>the Bright or Shining One</q> (Zeus, Jove) by which the
ancient Greeks and Italians designated their supreme
god?<note place='foot'>On the derivation of the names
Zeus and Jove from a root meaning
<q>shining,</q> <q>bright,</q> see Curtius,
<hi rend='italic'>Griech. Etymologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> p. 236; Vanič,
<hi rend='italic'>Griech.-Latein. Etymolog. Wörterbuch</hi>,
p. 353 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> On the relation of Jove
to the oak, compare Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xii. § 3, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>arborum genera numinibus
suis dicata perpetuo servantur, ut Jovi
aesculus</foreign>; Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> iii.
332, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>omnis quercus Jovi est consecrata</foreign>.
Zeus and Jupiter have commonly been
regarded as sky gods, because their
names are etymologically connected
with the Sanscrit word for sky. The
reason seems insufficient.</note> It is at least highly significant that, amongst
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
both Greeks and Italians, the oak should have been
the tree of the supreme god, that at his most ancient
shrines, both in Greece and Italy, this supreme god
should have been actually represented by an oak, and
that so soon as the barbarous Aryans of Northern
Europe appear in the light of history, they should be
found, amid all diversities of language, of character,
and of country, nevertheless at one in worshipping the
oak as the chief object of their religious reverence, and
extracting their sacred fire from its wood. If we are
to judge of the primitive religion of the European
Aryans by comparing the religions of the different
branches of the stock, the highest place in their
pantheon must certainly be assigned to the oak. The
result, then, of our inquiry is to make it probable that,
down to the time of the Roman Empire and the beginning
of our era, the primitive worship of the
Aryans was maintained nearly in its original form
in the sacred grove at Nemi, as in the oak woods
of Gaul, of Prussia, and of Scandinavia; and that
the King of the Wood lived and died as an incarnation
of the supreme Aryan god, whose life was in
the mistletoe or Golden Bough.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
If, in bidding farewell to Nemi, we look around us
for the last time, we shall find the lake and its surroundings
not much changed from what they were
in the days when Diana and Virbius still received
the homage of their worshippers in the sacred grove.
The temple of Diana, indeed, has disappeared, and the
King of the Wood no longer stands sentinel over the
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
Golden Bough. But Nemi's woods are still green,
and at evening you may hear the church bells of
Albano, and perhaps, if the air be still, of Rome itself,
ringing the Angelus. Sweet and solemn they chime
out from the distant city, and die lingeringly away
across the wide Campagnan marshes. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Le roi est mort,
vive le roi!</foreign>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note. Offerings of first-fruits.</head>

<p>
We have seen (vol. ii. p. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) that primitive peoples often partake
of the new corn sacramentally, because they suppose it to be instinct
with a divine spirit or life. At a later age, when the fruits of the earth
are conceived as produced rather than as animated by a divinity, the
new fruits are no longer partaken of sacramentally as the body and
blood of a god; but a portion of them is presented as a thank-offering
to the divine beings who are believed to have produced
them. Sometimes the first-fruits are presented to the king, probably
in his character of a god. Till the first-fruits have been offered to
the deity or the king, people are not at liberty to eat of the new
crops. But, as it is not always possible to draw a sharp line between
the sacrament and the sacrifice of first-fruits, it may be well to round
off this part of the subject by appending some miscellaneous examples
of the latter.
</p>

<p>
Among the Basutos, when the corn has been threshed and
winnowed, it is left in a heap on the threshing-floor. Before it
can be touched a religious ceremony must be performed. The
persons to whom the corn belongs bring a new vessel to the spot, in
which they boil some of the grain. When it is boiled they throw a
few handfuls of it on the heap of corn, saying, <q>Thank you, gods;
give us bread to-morrow also!</q> When this is done the rest is
eaten, and the provision for the year is considered pure and fit to
eat.<note place='foot'>Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, p. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the sacrifice of the first-fruits to the gods is the prominent
idea, which comes out again in the custom of leaving in the threshing-floor
a little hollow filled with grain, as a thank-offering to the gods.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 252.</note>
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
Still the Basutos retain a lively sense of the sanctity of the corn in
itself; for, so long as it is exposed to view, all defiled persons are
carefully kept from it. If it is necessary to employ a defiled person
in carrying home the harvest, he remains at some distance while the
sacks are being filled, and only approaches to place them upon the
draught oxen. As soon as the load is deposited at the dwelling he
retires, and under no pretext may he help to pour the corn into the
baskets in which it is kept.<note place='foot'>Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, p. 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Ashantee a harvest festival is held in September when the
yams are ripe. During the festival the king eats the new yams, but
none of the people may eat them till the close of the festival, which
lasts a fortnight. During its continuance the grossest liberty prevails;
theft, intrigue, and assault go unpunished, and each sex abandons
itself to its passions.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Tshi-speaking
Peoples of the Gold Coast</hi>, p. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
T. E. Bowdich, <hi rend='italic'>Mission to Ashantee</hi>,
p. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (ed. 1873.)</note> The Hovas of Madagascar present the first
sheaves of the new grain to the sovereign. The sheaves are carried
in procession to the palace from time to time as the grain ripens.<note place='foot'>J. Cameron, <q>On the Early Inhabitants
of Madagascar,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar Magazine</hi>,
iii. 263.</note>
So in Burma, when the <foreign rend='italic'>pangati</foreign> fruits ripen, some of them used to be
taken to the king's palace that he might eat of them; no one might
partake of them before the king.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, ii. 105.</note>
</p>

<p>
Every year, when they gather their first crops, the Kochs of
Assam offer some of the first-fruits to their ancestors, calling to them
by name and clapping their hands.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p.
91.</note> In August, when the rice
ripens, the Hos offer the first-fruits of the harvest to Sing Bonga,
who dwells in the sun. Along with the new rice a white cock is
sacrificed; and till the sacrifice has been offered no one may eat the
new rice.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 198.</note> Among the hill tribes near Rajamahall, in India, when
the <foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign> grain is being reaped in November or early in
December, a festival is held as a thanksgiving before the new grain
is eaten. On a day appointed by the chief a goat is sacrificed by
two men to a god called Chitariah Gossaih, after which the chief
himself sacrifices a fowl. Then the vassals repair to their fields,
offer thanksgiving, make an oblation to Kull Gossaih (who is
described as the Ceres of these mountaineers), and then return
to their houses to eat of the new <foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign>. As soon as the
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
inhabitants have assembled at the chief's house&mdash;the men sitting
on one side and the women on the other&mdash;a hog, a measure of
<foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign>, and a pot of spirits are presented to the chief, who in
return blesses his vassals, and exhorts them to industry and good
behaviour; <q>after which, making a libation in the names of all their
gods, and of their dead, he drinks, and also throws a little of the
<foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign> away, repeating the same pious exclamations.</q> Drinking
and festivity then begin, and are kept up for several days. The
same tribes have another festival at reaping the Indian corn in
August or September. Every man repairs to his fields with a hog,
a goat, or a fowl, which he sacrifices to Kull Gossaih. Then,
having feasted, he returns home, where another repast is prepared.
On this day it is customary for every family in the village to
distribute to every house a little of what they have prepared for
their feast. Should any person eat of the new <foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign> or the new
Indian corn before the festival and public thanksgiving at the
reaping of these crops, the chief fines him a white cock, which is
sacrificed to Chitariah.<note place='foot'>Thomas Shaw, <q>The Inhabitants
of the Hills near Rajamahall,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Asiatic
Researches</hi>, iv. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Central Provinces of India the first
grain of the season is always offered to the god Bhímsen or Bhím
Deo.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. No.
502.</note> In the Punjaub, when sugar-cane is planted, a woman puts on
a necklace and walks round the field, winding thread on to a spindle;<note place='foot'>This is curiously unlike the custom
of ancient Italy, in most parts of which
women were forbidden by law to walk
on the highroads twirling a spindle,
because this was supposed to injure
the crops. Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii.
§ 28.</note>
and when the sugar-cane is cut the first-fruits are offered on an altar,
which is built close to the press and is sacred to the sugar-cane god.
Afterwards the first-fruits are given to Brahmans. Also, when the
women begin to pick the cotton, they go round the field eating rice-milk,
the first mouthful of which they spit upon the field toward the
west; and the first cotton picked is exchanged at the village shop for
its weight in salt, which is prayed over and kept in the house till
the picking is finished.<note place='foot'>D. C. J. Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines of
Panjab Ethnography</hi> (Calcutta, 1883),
p. 119.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the island of Tjumba, East Indies, a festival is held after
harvest. Vessels filled with rice are presented as a thank-offering to
the gods. Then the sacred stone at the foot of a palm-tree is
sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed animal; and rice, with some of
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
the flesh, is laid on the stone for the gods. The palm-tree is hung with
lances and shields.<note place='foot'>Fr. Junghuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Battaländer
auf Sumatra</hi>, ii. 312.</note> The Dyaks of Borneo hold a feast of first-fruits
when the paddy (unhusked rice) is ripe. The priestesses, accompanied
by a gong and drum, go in procession to the farms and
gather several bunches of the ripe paddy. These are brought back
to the village, washed in cocoa-nut water, and laid round a bamboo
altar, which at the harvest festivals is erected in the common room of
the largest house. The altar is gaily decorated with white and red
streamers, and is hung with the sweet-smelling blossom of the areca
palm. The feast lasts two days, during which the village is tabooed;
no one may leave it. Only fowls are killed, and dancing and gong-beating
go on day and night. When the festival is over the people
are free to get in their crops.<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi>, i. 191. On
taboos observed at agricultural operations,
see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> i. 185; R. G. Woodthorpe,
<q>Wild Tribes Inhabiting the
so-called Naga Hills,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop.
Inst.</hi> xi. 71; <hi rend='italic'>Old New Zealand</hi>, by a
Pakeha Maori (London, 1884), p. 103
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui; or,
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p.
165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Tregear, <q>The Maoris of
New Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi>
xix. 110.</note>
</p>

<p>
The pounding of the new paddy is the occasion of a harvest
festival which is celebrated all over Celebes. The religious ceremonies
which accompany the feast were witnessed by Dr. B. F.
Matthes in July 1857. Two mats were spread on the ground, each
with a pillow on it. On one of the pillows were placed a man's
clothes and a sword, on the other a woman's clothes. These were
seemingly intended to represent the deceased ancestors. Rice and
water were placed before the two dummy figures, and they were
sprinkled with the new paddy. Also dishes of rice were set down
for the rest of the family and the slaves of the deceased. This was
the end of the ceremony.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Beknopt Verslag
mijner reizen in de Binnenlanden van
Celebes, in de jaren 1857 en 1861</hi>, p.
5.</note> The Minahassa of Celebes have a
festival of <q>eating the new rice.</q> Fowls or pigs are killed; some of
the flesh, with rice and palm-wine, is set apart for the gods, and then
the eating and drinking begin.<note place='foot'>N. Graafland, <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi>, i.
165.</note> The people of Kobi and Sariputi,
two villages on the north-east coast of Ceram, offer the first-fruits of
the paddy, in the form of cooked rice, with tobacco, etc., to their
ancestors, as a token of gratitude. The ceremony is called <q>feeding
the dead.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 107.</note> In the Tenimber and Timorlaut Islands, East Indies,
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
the first-fruits of the paddy, along with live fowls and pigs, are offered
to the <foreign rend='italic'>matmate</foreign>. The <foreign rend='italic'>matmate</foreign> are the spirits of their ancestors,
which are worshipped as guardian-spirits or household gods. They
are supposed to enter the house through an opening in the roof, and
to take up their abode temporarily in their skulls, or in images of
wood or ivory, in order to partake of the offerings and to help the
family. They also take the form of birds, pigs, crocodiles, turtles,
sharks, etc.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 281, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Amboina, after the rice or other harvest has been
gathered in, some of the new fruits are offered to the gods, and till
this is done, the priests may not eat of them. A portion of the new
rice, or whatever it may be, is boiled, and milk of the cocoa-nut is
poured on it, mixed with Indian saffron. It is then taken to the
place of sacrifice and offered to the god. Some people also pour out
oil before the deity; and if any of the oil is left over, they take it
home as a holy and priceless treasure, wherewith they smear the
forehead and breast of sick people and whole people, in the firm
conviction that the oil confers all kinds of blessings.<note place='foot'>Fr. Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en nieuw Oost-Indiën</hi>,
iii. 10.</note> The Irayas
and Catalangans of Luzon, tribes of the Malay stock, but of mixed
blood, worship chiefly the souls of their ancestors under the name of
<foreign rend='italic'>anitos</foreign>, to whom they offer the first-fruits of the harvest. The <foreign rend='italic'>anitos</foreign>
are household deities; some of them reside in pots in the corners of
the houses; and miniature houses, standing near the dwelling-house,
are especially sacred to them.<note place='foot'>C. Semper, <hi rend='italic'>Die Philippinen und
ihre Bewohner</hi>, p. 56.</note>
</p>

<p>
In certain tribes of Fiji <q>the first-fruits of the yam harvest are
presented to the ancestors in the Nanga [sacred stone enclosure] with
great ceremony, before the bulk of the crop is dug for the people's
use, and no man may taste of the new yams until the presentation
has been made. The yams thus offered are piled in the Great
Nanga, and are allowed to rot there. If any one were impiously
bold enough to appropriate them to his own use, he would be
smitten with madness. The mission teacher before mentioned told
me that when he visited the Nanga he saw among the weeds with
which it was overgrown numerous yam vines which had sprung up
out of the piles of decayed offerings. Great feasts are made at the
presentations of the first-fruits, which are times of public rejoicing,
and the Nanga itself is frequently spoken of as the <foreign rend='italic'>Mbaki</foreign>, or
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
Harvest.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <q>The Nanga,
or sacred stone enclosure, of Wainimala,
Fiji,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiv.
27.</note> In other parts of Fiji the practice with regard to the first-fruits
seems to have been different, for we are told by another
observer that <q>the first-fruits of the yams, which are always presented
at the principal temple of the district, become the property
of the priests, and form their revenue, although the pretence of their
being required for the use of the god is generally kept up.</q><note place='foot'>J. E. Erskine, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise
among the Islands of the Western Pacific</hi>,
p. 252.</note> In
Tana, one of the New Hebrides, the general name for gods appeared
to be <foreign rend='italic'>aremha</foreign>, which meant <q>a dead man.</q> The spirits of departed
ancestors were among the gods of the people. Chiefs who reached
an advanced age were deified after their death, addressed by name,
and prayed to on various occasions. They were supposed to preside
especially over the growth of the yams and fruit-trees. The
first-fruits were presented to them. A little of the new fruit was laid
on a stone, or on a shelving branch of the tree, or on a rude temporary
altar, made of a few sticks lashed together with strips of bark,
in the form of a table, with its four feet stuck in the ground. All
being quiet, the chief acted as high priest, and prayed aloud as
follows: <q>Compassionate father! here is some food for you; eat it;
be kind to us on account of it.</q> Then all the people shouted. This
took place about noon, and afterwards the assembled people feasted
and danced till midnight or morning.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In some of the Kingsmill Islands the god most commonly worshipped
was called Tubuériki. He was represented by a flat coral
stone, of irregular shape, about three feet long by eighteen inches
wide, set up on one end in the open air. Leaves of the cocoa-nut
palm were tied about it, considerably increasing its size and height.
The leaves were changed every month, that they might be always
fresh. The worship paid to the god consisted in repeating prayers
before the stone, and laying beside it a portion of the food prepared
by the people for their own use. This they did at their daily meals,
at festivals, and whenever they specially wished to propitiate the
favour of the god. The first-fruits of the season were always offered
to him. Every family of distinction had one of these stones
which was considered rather in the light of a family altar than as an
idol.<note place='foot'>Horatio Hale, <hi rend='italic'>United States Exploring
Expedition, Ethnology and
Philology</hi>, p. 97.</note>
</p>

<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>

<p>
The following is a description of the festival of first-fruits as it
was celebrated in Tonga in the days when a European flag rarely
floated among the islands of the Pacific. <q rend='pre'><foreign rend='italic'>Inachi.</foreign> This word means
literally a share or portion of any thing that is to be, or has been,
distributed out: but in the sense here mentioned it means that portion
of the fruits of the earth, and other eatables, which is offered to
the gods in the person of the divine chief Tooitonga, which allotment
is made once a year, just before the yams in general are arrived at a
state of maturity; those which are used in this ceremony being
planted sooner than others, and, consequently, they are the first-fruits
of the yam season. The object of this offering is to insure the protection
of the gods, that their favour may be extended to the welfare
of the nation generally, and in particular to the productions of the
earth, of which yams are the most important.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The time for planting most kinds of yams is about the latter end
of July, but the species called <foreign rend='italic'>caho-caho</foreign>, which is always used in this
ceremony, is put in the ground about a month before, when, on each
plantation, there is a small piece of land chosen and fenced in, for
the purpose of growing a couple of yams of the above description.
As soon as they have arrived at a state of maturity, the <foreign rend='italic'>How</foreign> [King]
sends a messenger to Tooitonga, stating that the yams for the <foreign rend='italic'>inachi</foreign>
are fit to be taken up, and requesting that he would appoint a day
for the ceremony; he generally fixes on the tenth day afterwards,
reckoning the following day for the first. There are no particular
preparations made till the day before the ceremony; at night, however,
the sound of the conch is heard occasionally in different parts
of the islands, and as the day of the ceremony approaches, it becomes
more frequent, so that the people of almost every plantation sound
the conch three or four times, which, breaking in upon the silence of
the night, has a pleasing effect, particularly at Vavaoo, where the
number of woods and hills send back repeated echoes, adding greatly
to the effect. The day before the ceremony the yams are dug up,
and ornamented with a kind of ribbon prepared from the inner
membrane of the leaf of a species of pandanus, and dyed red....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The sun has scarcely set when the sound of the conch begins
again to echo through the island, increasing as the night advances.
At the Mooa [capital] and all the plantations the voices of men and
women are heard singing <foreign rend='italic'>Nófo óoa tegger gnaoóe, óooa gnaoóe</foreign>, Rest
thou, doing no work; thou shalt not work. This increases till midnight,
men generally singing the first part of the sentence, and the
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
women the last: it then subsides for three or four hours, and again
increases as the sun rises. Nobody, however, is seen stirring out in
the public roads till about eight o'clock, when the people from all
quarters of the island are seen advancing towards the Mooa, and
canoes from all the other islands are landing their men; so that all
the inhabitants of Tonga seem approaching by sea and land, singing
and sounding the conch. At the Mooa itself the universal bustle of
preparation is seen and heard; and the different processions entering
from various quarters of men and women, all dressed up in new
<foreign rend='italic'>gnatoos</foreign>, ornamented with red ribbons and wreaths of flowers, and the
men armed with spears and clubs, betoken the importance of the
ceremony about to be performed. Each party brings in its yams in
a basket, which is carried in the arms with great care by the principal
vassal of the chief to whom the plantation may belong. The baskets
are deposited in the <foreign rend='italic'>malái</foreign><note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>malái</foreign> is <q>a piece of ground,
generally before a large house, or
chief's grave, where public ceremonies
are principally held.</q> Mariner, <hi rend='italic'>Tonga
Islands, Vocabulary</hi>.</note> (in the <foreign rend='italic'>Mooa</foreign>), and some of them begin
to employ themselves in slinging the yams, each upon the centre of a
pole about eight or nine feet long, and four inches diameter. The
proceedings are regulated by attending matabooles.<note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>mataboole</foreign> is <q>a rank next
below chiefs or nobles.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> The yams being
all slung, each pole is carried by two men upon their shoulders, one
walking before the other, and the yam hanging between them, ornamented
with red ribbons. The procession begins to move towards
the grave of the last Tooitonga (which is generally in the neighbourhood,
or the grave of one of his family will do), the men advancing
in a single line, every two bearing a yam, with a slow and measured
pace, sinking at every step, as if their burden were of immense
weight. In the meantime the chiefs and matabooles are seated in a
semicircle before the grave, with their heads bowed down, and their
hands clasped before them.</q> The procession then marched round
the grave twice or thrice in a great circle, the conchs blowing and
the men singing. Next the yams, still suspended from the poles,
were deposited before the grave, and their bearers sat down beside
them. One of the <foreign rend='italic'>matabooles</foreign> of Tooitonga now addressed the gods
generally, and afterwards particularly, mentioning the late Tooitonga,
and the names of several others. He thanked them for their divine
bounty in favouring the land with the prospect of so good a harvest,
and prayed that their beneficence might be continued in future.
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
When he had finished, the men rose and resumed their loads, and
after parading two or three times round the grave, marched back to
the <foreign rend='italic'>malái</foreign>, singing and blowing the conchs as before. The chiefs
and <foreign rend='italic'>matabooles</foreign> soon followed to the same place, where the yams had
been again deposited. Here the company sat down in a great circle,
presided over by Tooitonga. Then the other articles that formed
part of the <foreign rend='italic'>Inachi</foreign> were brought forward, consisting of dried fish,
mats, etc., which, with the yams, were divided into shares. About a
fourth was allotted to the gods, and appropriated by the priests;
about a half fell to the king; and the remainder belonged to
Tooitonga. The materials of the <foreign rend='italic'>Inachi</foreign> having been carried away,
the company set themselves to drink <foreign rend='italic'>cava</foreign>, and a <foreign rend='italic'>mataboole</foreign> addressed
them, saying that the gods would protect them, and grant them long
lives, if they continued to observe the religious ceremonies and
to pay respect to the chiefs.<note place='foot'>W. Mariner, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Natives
of the Tonga Islands</hi> (London, 1818),
ii. 196-203.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Samoans used to present the first-fruits to the spirits (<foreign rend='italic'>aitus</foreign>)
and chiefs.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the United
States Exploring Expedition</hi>, ii. 133.</note> For example, a family whose god was in the form of an
eel presented the first-fruits of their taro plantations to the eel.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
Tahiti <q>the first fish taken periodically on their shores, together
with a number of kinds regarded as sacred, were conveyed to the
altar. The first-fruits of their orchards and gardens were also
<foreign rend='italic'>taumaha</foreign>, or offered, with a portion of their live stock, which consisted
of pigs, dogs, and fowls, as it was supposed death would be
inflicted on the owner or the occupant of the land from which the god
should not receive such acknowledgment.</q><note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, i.
350.</note> In Huahine, one of the
Society Islands, the first-fruits were presented to the god Tani. A
poor person was expected to bring two of the earliest fruits gathered,
of whatever kind; a <foreign rend='italic'>raatira</foreign> had to bring ten, and chiefs and princes
had to bring more, according to their rank and riches. They
brought the fruits to the temple, where they threw them down on the
ground, with the words, <q>Here, Tani, I have brought you something
to eat.</q><note place='foot'>Tyerman and Bennet, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
Voyages and Travels</hi>, i. 284.</note> The chief gods of the Easter Islanders were Make-Make
and Haua. To these they offered the first of all the produce of the
ground.<note place='foot'>Geiseler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Oester-Insel</hi> (Berlin,
1883), p. 31.</note> Amongst the Maoris the offering of the first-fruits of the
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
sweet potatoes to Pani, son of Rongo, the god of sweet potatoes, was
a solemn religious ceremony.<note place='foot'>E. Tregear, <q>The Maoris of New
Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xix.
110.</note>
</p>

<p>
It has been affirmed that the old Prussians offered the first-fruits
of their crops and of their fishing to the god Curcho, but doubt rests
on the statement.<note place='foot'>Hartknoch, <hi rend='italic'>Alt und neues Preussen</hi>,
p. 161; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertationes historicae
de variis rebus Prussicis</hi>, p. 163 (appended
to his edition of Dusburg's
<hi rend='italic'>Chronicon Prussiae</hi>). Cp. W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>, p. 27.</note> The Romans sacrificed the first ears of corn to
Ceres, and the first of the new wine to Liber; and until the priests
had offered these sacrifices, the people might not eat the new corn
nor drink the new wine.<note place='foot'>Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>sacrima</hi>, p. 319, ed.
Müller; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii. § 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
The chief solemnity of the Natchez, an Indian tribe on the Lower
Mississippi, was the Harvest Festival or the Festival of New Fire.
When the time for the festival drew near, a crier went through the
villages calling upon the people to prepare new vessels and new
garments, to wash their houses, and to burn the old grain, the old
garments, and the old utensils in a common fire. He also proclaimed
an amnesty to criminals. Next day he appeared again,
commanding the people to fast for three days, to abstain from all
pleasures, and to make use of the medicine of purification. Thereupon
all the people took some drops extracted from a root which
they called the <q>root of blood.</q> It was a kind of plantain and
distilled a red liquor which acted as a violent emetic. During their
three days' fast the people kept silence. At the end of it the crier
proclaimed that the festival would begin on the following day. So
next morning, as soon as it began to grow light in the sky, the people
streamed from all quarters towards the temple of the Sun. The temple
was a large building with two doors, one opening to the east, the other
to the west. On this morning the eastern door of the temple stood
open. Facing the eastern door was an altar, placed so as to catch
the first beams of the rising sun. An image of a <foreign rend='italic'>chouchouacha</foreign>
(a small marsupial) stood upon the altar; on its right was an image
of a rattlesnake, on its left an image of a marmoset. Before these
images a fire of oak bark burned perpetually. Once a year only, on
the eve of the Harvest Festival, was the sacred flame suffered to die
out. To the right of the altar, on <q>this pious morn,</q> stood the great
chief, who took his title and traced his descent from the Sun. To the
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
left of the altar stood his wife. Round them were grouped, according
to their ranks, the war chiefs, the sachems, the heralds, and the young
braves. In front of the altar were piled bundles of dry reeds, stacked
in concentric rings.
</p>

<p>
The high priest, standing on the threshold of the temple, kept his
eyes fixed on the eastern horizon. Before presiding at the festival he
had to plunge thrice into the Mississippi. In his hands he held two
pieces of dry wood which he kept rubbing slowly against each other,
muttering magic words. At his side two acolytes held two cups filled
with a kind of black sherbet. All the women, their backs turned to
the east, each leaning with one hand on her rude mattock and
supporting her infant with the other, stood in a great semicircle at
the gate of the temple. Profound silence reigned throughout the
multitude while the priest watched attentively the growing light in
the east. As soon as the diffused light of dawn began to be shot
with beams of fire, he quickened the motion of the two pieces of
wood which he held in his hands; and at the moment when the
upper edge of the sun's disc appeared above the horizon, fire flashed
from the wood and was caught in tinder. At the same instant the
women outside the temple faced round and held up their infants
and their mattocks to the rising sun.
</p>

<p>
The great chief and his wife now drank the black liquor. The
priests kindled the circle of dried reeds; fire was set to the heap
of oak bark on the altar, and from this sacred flame all the hearths
of the village were rekindled. No sooner were the circles of reeds
consumed than the chief's wife came forth from the temple and
placing herself at the head of the women marched in procession
to the harvest fields, whither the men were not allowed to follow
them. They went to gather the first sheaves of maize and returned
to the temple bearing them on their heads. Some of the sheaves
they presented to the high priest, who laid them on the altar.
Others they used to bake the unleavened bread which was to be
eaten in the evening. The eastern door of the sanctuary was now
closed, and the western door was opened.
</p>

<p>
When the day began to decline, the multitude assembled once
more at the temple, this time at its western gate, where they formed
a great crescent, with the horns turned toward the west. The
unleavened bread was held up and presented to the setting sun,
and a priest struck up a hymn in praise of his descending light.
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
When darkness had fallen the whole plain twinkled with fires, round
which the people feasted; and the sounds of music and revelry
broke the silence of night.<note place='foot'>Chateaubriand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>,
pp. 130-136 (Michel Lévy, Paris,
1870). Chateaubriand's description is
probably based on earlier accounts,
which I have been unable to trace.
Compare, however, Le Petit, <q>Relation
des Natchez,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de voiages au
Nord</hi>, ix. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Amsterdam edition);
De Tonti, <q>Relation de la Louisiane
et du Mississippi,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> v. 122; Charlevoix,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle France</hi>,
vi. 183; <hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>,
vii. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Aachen, fire festival at, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aargau, trees planted at births in, ii. <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aberdeenshire, ceremony at the cutting of the last sheaf in, i. 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abyssinia, rain-making on the outskirts of, i. 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abyssinian festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acagchemen tribe, adoration of the buzzard by the, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonis, myth and worship of, i. 279-282, 296;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connection with vegetation, i. 281;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of, i. 284-296;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, similar to those of Osiris, i. 319, 320;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probable origin of the cult of, i. 363;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lament of, i. 280, 399;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a pig, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aegira, blood drunk at, before prophesying, i. 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aethiopian kings confined to their palaces, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Afghan Boundary Mission, reception of the, by the natives, i. 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Afghanistan, reception of strangers in, i. 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, weather kings common in, i. 44;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reluctance to accept the crown in some parts of West, i. 118, 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priestly kings on the west coast of, i. 112;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human heart eaten in the Shire Highlands of, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ague, cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aht Indians, seclusion of girls amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ain, May-day customs in the Département de l', i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aino type of sacrament, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134-136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ainos, bear festival of the, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101-105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preparation for fishing, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of the bear, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaskan sable hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alban hills, i. 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mount, i. 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albania, Easter Eve custom in, i. 276; ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scapegoat in, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beating in, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, commemoration of the death of Adonis and Aphrodite at, i. 279, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfoers, function of their high priest Leleen, i. 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony for restoring the soul, i. 134, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest's hair uncut, i. 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest sows the first rice seed and plucks the first ripe rice, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving away the devil by the, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Algeria, midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alligator, the man-eating, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alps, May-day custom in the, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altisheim, harvest custom in, i. 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altmark, Whitsuntide customs in, i. 98;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amboina, soul-abstracting in, i. 139, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sprinkling the sick with spices in, i. 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair burying in, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disease boats in, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>strength thought to be in the hair in, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amenhôtep IV and the sun-god, i. 314, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>America, belief in the resurrection of the buffalo in the western prairies of, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon, rage of the sun-god Ra against, i. 315;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rams held sacred by the worshippers of, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andamanese belief in the reflection as the soul, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderida, wealds of Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, remnants of the forest of, i. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angel-man, beheading the, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angoulême, custom of burning a poplar on St. Peter's Day in, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angoy, king of, must have no bodily defects, i. 221</l>
</lg>

<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>

<lg>
<l>Animal worship, two types of, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred carried in procession, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139-147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed as a scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189-191</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eaten to obtain its quality, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spared by savages from fear of the vengeance of other animals of the same kind, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107-110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respect shown by the savage for the animal he kills, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110-132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Savage belief in the resurrection of the, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122-125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt as representative of the spirit of vegetation, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282-284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annamites, soul superstition amongst the, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antaymour kings responsible for the general welfare, i. 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antrim, harvest custom in, i. 339</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apache Indians, rain-making by the, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apalai Indians, ceremony on the arrival of a stranger by the, i. 153, 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aphrodite, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apis the sacred Egyptian bull drowned, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo Diradiotes, blood of sacrificial lamb drunk in the temple of, i. 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apple-tree, superstition with regard to the, by barren women, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabia, belief concerning a man's shadow in, i. 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabian stories, the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabic belief in the properties of lion's fat, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs, rain-making by the heathen, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arcadia, rain-charm in, i. 21;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beating the scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archon of Plataeae, the, may not touch iron, i. 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arden, forest of, i. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argive tradition concerning Dionysus, i. 324, 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ariadne, marriage of, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aricia, <q>there are many Manii at,</q> explanation of the proverb, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arician Grove, the, i. 1-6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest celebration, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Manius the traditional founder of the, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrament, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aru Islands, soul superstition in the, i. 125, 126;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom after a death in the, i. 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair cutting, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dog's flesh eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arval Brothers, priestly college of the, and the sacred grove, i. 65;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred grove of the, and iron, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryans, the, tree worshippers, i. 56-59, 99;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totemism and the, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak the sacred tree of the, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primitive worship, ii. <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension Day custom, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aschbach, harvest custom in, i. 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ash Wednesday customs, i. 254-257; ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashantee, royal blood not shed in, i. 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia Minor, Pontiffs of, i. 7, 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athene, relation of the goat to, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, annual marriage of the queen to Dionysus at, i. 103, 104;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of Adonis observed in, i. 284, 285;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scapegoats in, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual at the sacrifice of the ox in, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attis, myth and festival of, i. 296-298; ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a tree-spirit or corn-spirit, i. 298-300;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probability that the high priest of, was slain in the character of the god, i. 300;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probable origin of the cult of, i. 363;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to Lityerses, i. 396, 397;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a pig, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australia, rain-making in, i. 20, 21;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony on entering strange territory by the Australians, i. 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of women in, i. 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood may not be spilt on the ground in some parts of, i. 181, 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair burning after child-birth in, i. 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totemism, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334-336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australian blacks' charm for staying the sun, i. 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attack the dust columns of red sand, i. 29, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of women's blood, i. 185, 186; ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remedy for toothache, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Kamilaroi, cannibalism by the, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; medicine man and recall of the soul, i. 131, 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Wotjobaluk, rain-making by the, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austria, charm for lulling the wind in, i. 28;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old peasant belief in the souls of trees in, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auxerre, reaping custom at, i. 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Axim, annual expulsion of devils at, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aymara Indians, scapegoat used by the, in times of plague, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aztecs, the, and the reflection-soul, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>aversion to wine, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baba, a name given to the last sheaf, i. 339, 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babar Islands, restoration of the soul in the, i. 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the soul believed to be in the shadow, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylon, Sacaea festival at, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian legend concerning the goddess Istar, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>

<lg>
<l>Baffin Land, expulsion of evil by the Eskimo of, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagota, restrictions on the heir to the throne in, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balder killed by the mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the oak, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of, in the mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg359'>359-362</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balder's bale-fires, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bali, mice and the rice fields of the island of, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>periodic expulsion of devils, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at a birth, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balquhidder, harvest custom in, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banjar kings held responsible for the weather, i. 46, 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banks Islanders, the tamaniu of the, ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baranton, fountain of, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barcelona, Mid-Lent custom in, i. 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bari tribe, rain kings of the, i. 52, 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barotse, the chief a demigod in, i. 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barren women's superstition regarding the apple-tree, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassam, Great, sacrifice of oxen at, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of driving out the evil spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basutos, the, and the reflection-soul, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannibalism by the, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bat, the, ii. <ref target='Pg334'>334-337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battambang, rain-charm in, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battas, the, fighting the wind, i. 28, 29;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuse to fell trees, i. 64, 65;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul superstition, i. 124, 125, 135, 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul straying, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of making the curse to fly away by the, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totemism amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in plurality of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavaria, May custom in, i. 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Whitsuntide representative of the tree-spirit in, i. 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 342; ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for fever, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter bonfires in, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer bonfires in, ii. <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bear, Shrovetide, i. 254, 255;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of the, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99-108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at killing a, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111-113</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony before a bear-hunt, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bears, dead, treated with respect, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111-113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beasts, divine, held responsible for the course of nature, i. 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beating as a ceremonial purification, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213-217</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232-234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beauce, straw man in, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beavers, superstition about killing, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bechuanaland, rain-charm in, i. 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sun superstition in, i. 23;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hack-thorn held sacred in, i. 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purification after travel, i. 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crocodile superstition in, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of ills in, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bedouins, pursuing the wind, i. 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belfast, harvest custom at, i. 336, 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belgium, procession with wicker giant in, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belli-Paaro, ceremony of, in Quoja, ii. <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beltane fires, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254-258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bengal, Gardens of Adonis in, i. 288, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernkastel, reaping custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berry, belief regarding the birth of the corn-spirit in, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhagats, mock human sacrifices by the, i. 252, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhotan, man worshippers in, i. 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biajas of Borneo, expulsion of diseases to sea by the, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bidasari, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilaspur, custom at, on the death of a Rajah, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birch-tree dressed in women's clothes in Russia at Whitsuntide, i. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Births, trees planted at, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bison, resurrection of the, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bithynia, lament by the reapers in, i. 365</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black Lake, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blankenfelde, harvest custom in, i. 370</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bleeding trees, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blekinge, midsummer ceremonies in, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood, the soul thought to be in the, i. 178, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>royal blood not spilt upon the ground, i. 179-183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ill effect of seeing, i. 185, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread of contact with, i. 185-187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primitive dread of menstruous, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238-241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood-drinking, inspiration by, i. 34, 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boba, a name given to the last sheaf, i. 340, 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boeotians of Plataea, festival of the, i. 100-103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boeroe, ceremony at the rice harvest in, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemian midsummer custom, i. 79; ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mid-Lent custom, i. 82;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Whit Monday custom, i. 91, 244-247;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of carrying out Death, i. 258-260;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition regarding death, i. 260;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of bringing back summer, i. 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, i. 340;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white mice spared in Bohemia, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition held by poachers in Bohemia, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhmer Wald Mountains, custom of the reapers in the, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>

<lg>
<l>Bolang Mongondo, recapture of the soul in, i. 131;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preservation of cut hair, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at rice harvest in, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bombay, soul superstition in, i. 127</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bones of animals not broken by savages, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boni, king of, and his courtiers, i. 222, 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Booandik tribe superstition concerning the blood of women, i. 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of the Dead, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bormus, the name given to the lament of the Bithynian reapers, i. 365, 398</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borneo, custom in, regarding infested persons, i. 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bouphonia, the, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38-41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brabant, North, Whitsuntide custom in, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahman soul story, i. 128, 129;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin eaters, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmans, temple of the, i. 230;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of sins by the, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brandy, North American Indian theory about, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazilian Indians, self-beating by the, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of girls at the age of puberty by the, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bresse, May customs in, i. 98;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony regarding the last sheaf, i. 408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brest, fire festival at, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breton peasant and the wind, i. 30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briançon, May-day in the neighbourhood of, i. 95;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride, a name given to the binder of the last sheaf, i. 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brie, May-day custom in, i. 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 370, 375;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burning of mock giant in, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britanny, reaping custom in, i. 335, 336;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British Columbia, fish ceremony by the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruck, harvest custom in, i. 333, 334</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brüd's bed in the Highlands, i. 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brunnen, Twelfth Night custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brunswick, Whitsuntide customs in, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddhist animism, i. 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Tartar worship, i. 42, 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffalo, belief in the resurrection of the, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>held sacred by the Todas, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bull, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarian rain-charm, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at the laying of a foundation stone, i. 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, i. 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull, Dionysus as a, i. 325, 326; ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37-44</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19-24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris and the, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59-61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burghers, first seed sowing and reaping amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of sins by the, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgundian kings deposed in times of scarcity, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burma, mode of executing princes of the blood in, i. 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>head-washing in, i. 188, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mock burial in time of sickness in, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of driving away cholera in, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offering of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burmese and the soul, i. 130</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnt sacrifices among the Celts, ii. <ref target='Pg278'>278-280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buro Islands, dog's flesh eaten in the, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disease boats, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burying alive, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Busiris, legend of, i. 400, 401</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterfly, the Samoans and the, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buzzard, sacrifice of the sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90-92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byblus, lamentation for the death of Adonis at, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabria, expulsion of witches in, ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calcutta, iron-charm used in, i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calf, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19-24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calicut, kings killed at the expiry of twelve years in, i. 224, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Californian Indians, their opinion of the dust columns, i. 30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifice of the buzzard, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caligula, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callander, Beltane fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambodia, search for inspired man in time of epidemic in, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings of fire and water in, i. 53-56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its sacred tree, i. 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings of, i. 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>touching the king's body in, i. 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man's head not touched in, i. 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the cutting of the king's hair in, i. 197;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary kings of, i. 228;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Stiens of Cambodia and the killing of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of evil spirits, etc. in, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls in, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambridgeshire, harvest custom in, i. 341, 342</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cameroons, the life of a person supposed to be bound up with that of a tree by the, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canadian Indians, detention of the soul amongst the, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beaver hunting by the, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candlemas Day customs, i. 97; ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<lg>
<l>Canelos Indians, their belief of the soul in the portrait, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cannibalism, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capital offences, i. 162, 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carcassonne, hunting the wren in, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caribs, the, belief in the plurality of souls, ii. <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carinthia, ceremonies on St. George's Day in, i. 84, 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the installation of a prince of, i. 232, 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carmona, custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnival, ceremony of burying the, i. 244, 252-257, 270, 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnival Fool, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpathus islanders, reluctance to have their likenesses drawn, i. 148, 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of sickness by the, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cashmere stories, the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302-304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cat, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caterpillars, method of freeing a garden from, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattle, trees and, i. 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven through the fire, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cedar, the sacred, of Gilgit, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celebes, the, and the soul, i. 123-125;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom regarding infested persons, i. 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition regarding the knife, i. 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood not spilt on the ground by the, i. 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at a birth, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest festival, ii. <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celtic human sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg278'>278-284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Celtic stories, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceram, rain-making in, i. 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition regarding the blood of women in, i. 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair cutting superstition in, i. 194; ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disease boats in, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony in epidemic, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls in, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiation ceremony, ii. <ref target='Pg354'>354-356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaeronea, human scapegoat in, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chambéry, threshing ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chedooba, ceremony on felling a tree in the island of, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheremiss, expulsion of Satan by the, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherokee Indians, purification festival of the, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chester, procession of mock giant at, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chibchas, weather kings of the, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children sacrificed by their parents, i. 235-237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chile, preservation of cut hair in, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>China, emperors of, offer public sacrifices, i. 8;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rain-charm in, i. 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emperor held responsible for drought, etc., i. 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abstention from knives after a death in, i. 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony to welcome the return of spring in, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special seat of courage amongst the Chinese, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannibalism in, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoat in, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of the aboriginal tribes of, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chios, rites of Dionysus at, i. 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chippeways, seclusion of women amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiriguanos, seclusion of girls by the, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chitomé, the, i. 113-115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to die a natural death, i. 217, 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cholera, driving away, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chontal Indians, the nagual amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian, Captain, shooting of, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christmas customs, i. 60, 334; ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29-31</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrudim, ceremony of carrying out Death at, i. 259, 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chuwash, the, test of a suitable sacrificial victim, i. 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circassians, the pear-tree believed to be the protector of cattle by the, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision, i. 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clucking-hen, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cobern, fire festival at, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cobra Capella, sacrifice of the, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7-10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columbia River, Indians of the, and the salmon, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comanches, rain-charm used by the, i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compitalia, festival of the, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congo belief in the souls of trees, i. 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Chitomé in the kingdom of, i. 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>negroes and soul selling, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiatory rites in the valley of the, ii. <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coorg rice-harvest ceremonies, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corea, kings of, confined to their palaces, i. 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may not be touched, i. 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tigers' bones valuable in, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn drenched as a rain-charm, i. 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>double personification of the, i. 358, 359;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reaper, binder, or thresher wrapt up in corn, i. 370, 371</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; baby, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; goat, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mother, i. 232, 233;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a prototype of Demeter, i. 356</l>
</lg>

<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>

<lg>
<l>Corn queen, i. 341</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirit, the, as the grandmother, etc., i. 336-343;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as youthful, i. 343-346;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of, i. 363, 364;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>binding persons in sheaves as representatives of the, i. 367-372;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pretence of killing the, or its representative, i. 372-380;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by a stranger, i. 375-380;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by a human victim, i. 390-395;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how the representative is chosen, i. 393;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an animal, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1-67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a cock, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7-10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a hare, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a cat, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a goat, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12-17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a bull, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19-24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a calf, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a cow, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a mare, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a horse, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a pig, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26-31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>parallelism between the anthropomorphic and theriomorphic conceptions of the, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of the, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suggested explanation of the embodiment of the, in animal form, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ox as the embodiment of the, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41-43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; wolf, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3-7</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; woman, i. 342, 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornwall, May-day custom in, i. 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer bonfires in, i. 101; ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reaping cries in, i. 407</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corsica, midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cough, cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Court ceremonies, i. 22, 23; ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cow, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man in cow's hide, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cow as a scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cracow, harvest customs in, i. 340</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crannon, rain-charm at, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creek Indians, festival of the first-fruits amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75-78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opinions held regarding the properties of various foods amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of women by the, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crete, sacrifices in, i. 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Dionysus in, i. 324;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of Demeter in, i. 331</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croatia, beating in, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crocodiles spared from fear of the vengeance of other crocodiles, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crops, kings and priests punished for the failure of the, i. 46-48;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices for the, i. 383, 384;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at the eating of the new, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacramental eating of the new, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68-77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crying the Neck, i. 405-408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curka Coles of India, their belief that the tops of trees are inhabited, i. 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curse, ceremony of making the curse to fly away, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyzicus, construction of the council chamber of, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacotas and the resurrection of the dog, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daedala, festival of the, i. 100-103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dahomey, king of, a capital offence to see him eat, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damaras, custom of the, after travel, i. 158;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood of cattle not shed by the, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danae, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danger Islanders, soul snare used by the, i. 138, 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danzig, burying of cut hair in, i. 202;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reaping custom, i. 333;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest ceremony, i. 367, 368</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dards, the, rain-charm, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darfur, veiling the sultan of, i. 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sultans and their courtiers, i. 222;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the liver thought to be the seat of the soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darowen, midsummer bonfires at, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead Sunday, i. 254, 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death, preference for a violent, i. 216, 217;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning, i. 260;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>carrying out,</q> i. 257-261, 264-271; ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving out, i. 258, 259, 272, 276;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the custom of <q>carrying out</q> Death is probably a divine scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206-208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at the burying of, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigy of, i. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Debden, May Day custom in, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deer, regard for, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deities, reduplication of, i. 360-362</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demeter, the corn mother, i. 331, 332;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals of, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44-47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a pig, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44-49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legend of the Phigalian, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representation of the black, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Proserpine, myth of, i. 330, 331;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probable origin of, i. 355 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prototypes of, i. 356, 357</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demons, the soul carried off by, i. 132-135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denderah, tree of Osiris at, i. 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denmark Christmas customs, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer bonfires, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devils, ceremony at the expulsion of, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159-162</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170-185</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by men and expelled, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183-185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devonshire reaping cries, i. 405, 406;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rain-charm, i. 408;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for cough, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diana, rule of the priesthood of, i. 2, 3, 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at the festival of, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arician Grove said to be first consecrated to her by Manius Egerius, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a tree goddess, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diana's mirror, i. 1</l>
</lg>

<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>

<lg>
<l>Dieyerie of South Australia, rain-making by the, i. 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree superstition amongst the, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dingelstedt, harvest custom at, i. 371</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysus, marriage of, i. 104;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>titles of, i. 320, 321;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>myth of, i. 322-325;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, i. 324, 329; ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43-46</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, similar to those of Osiris, i. 319, 320;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an animal, i. 325-327, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34-38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>association of, with Demeter and Proserpine, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diseases sent away in boats, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185-189</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divine beasts, i. 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; king, dependence of nature upon the, i. 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings, i. 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>care taken of, i. 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cease to govern, i. 118, 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings and priests, burdensome observances placed upon, i. 110-118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of these burdens, i. 118-120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Man as scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; persons, seclusion of, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirit, transmigration of, i. 42-44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divining rods made from the mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3-7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the flesh of the, eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resurrection of the, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as a scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domalde, King of Sweden, sacrificed, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Douai, annual procession at, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams, festival of, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druids, oak-worship of the, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dublin, May Day custom in, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duk-duk, the, ii. <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duke of York Island, fishing ceremony by the natives of, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dulyn, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunkirk, annual procession at, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dust columns, i. 30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dutch criminals, cutting the hair of, to enforce confession, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyaks, belief in the souls of trees amongst the, i. 59, 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abduction of the soul, i. 132, 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restoration of the soul, i. 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, i. 68, 69, 353, 354;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Dyaks and bad omens, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom in epidemic, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may not eat venison, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spare the crocodile, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dyaks and the palm-tree, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Indian Islands, supposed cure for epilepsy in the, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter customs, i. 272, 276, 334; ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islanders, blood of an animal not shed by the, i. 182, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eating animals to get their qualities, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85-89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the god, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67-90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and drinking, precautions taken at, i. 160-162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edersleben, midsummer fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Efugaos, cannibalism by the, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egeria, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, beasts responsible for the course of nature in Upper, i. 48;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian kings deified, i. 49, 50;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian kings blamed for failure of crops, i. 50;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient Egyptian kings did not drink wine, i. 184, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary-rulers in Upper Egypt, i. 231;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of burning red-haired men by the ancient Egyptians, i. 307;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religion of ancient Egypt, i. 313;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptians and the pig, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the bulls Apis and Mnevis worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred cattle in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of the ram in, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian type of sacrament, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134-136</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Egyptian story, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315-318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eifel mountains, fire festival in the, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest omens in the, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eisenach, ceremony of bringing back summer in, i. 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of carrying out death in, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elan, regard for the, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephant, ceremony at the killing of an, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113-115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleusis, mysteries of, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elk, regard for the, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellwangen, harvest ceremony in, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emin Pasha's reception in a Central African village, i. 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emu wren, ii. <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encounter Bay tribe, their dread of women's blood, i. 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>English tradition concerning the killing of the wren, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Entlebuch, human scapegoat in, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Entraigues, hunting the wren in, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epidemic, ceremony in time of, i. 36; ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187-189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epilepsy, supposed cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erfurt, harvest custom in, i. 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ertingen, midsummer custom in, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erzgebirge, Shrovetide custom in the, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eskimos, charm for lulling the wind, i. 28;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eskimos and the soul, i. 122;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reception of strangers, i. 155;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eskimo women, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<lg>
<l>Essex, hunting the wren in, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonian superstition regarding the welfare of cattle, i. 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood not tasted by the Esthonians, i. 178, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief concerning women's blood, i. 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preservation of the parings of nails by the Esthonians, i. 204;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carrying out the effigy of Death, i. 270;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the eating of the new corn, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread of the weevil by the Esthonian peasants, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethiopian kings and their courtiers, i. 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etruscan wizards, i. 22</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>European rain-charm, i. 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forests, i. 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246-285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evils, expulsion of, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>occasional, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158-162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>periodic, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162-182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two kinds of expulsion of evils, the direct or immediate, and the indirect or mediate, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>general observations on, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202-206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fauns, representation of the, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Fauns wood and corn-spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feilenhof, the wolf a corn-spirit in, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feloupes of Senegambia, charm for rain-making, i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fern seed, midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fernando Po, restrictions on the food of the king of, i. 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fever, cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fida, no one to drink out of the king's glass in, i. 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Field of Mars, chariot race on the, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64-66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiji, charm used for staying the sun in, i. 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gods of, i. 39;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul extraction in, i. 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in two souls in, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eating in the presence of suspected persons avoided in, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-immolation at old age in, i. 216;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils in, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiatory rites in, ii. <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finland, wind selling in, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle protected by the wood god in, i. 105, 106;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the killing of a bear in, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire festivals, human sacrifices offered at, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festivals in Europe, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246-285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>they were charms to make the sun shine, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings, i. 53-56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacred, made by the friction of wood, ii. <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made with oak wood, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire spirit, expulsion of the, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firstborn sacrificed, i. 236, 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First-fruits, festival of the, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75-78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of, ii. <ref target='Pg373'>373-384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fish, respect shown by savages to, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118-122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fish preachers, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fladda's chapel and wind-making, i. 26, 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flamen Dialis, rules of life, i. 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to walk under a trellised vine, i. 183, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cuttings from the hair and nails buried, i. 200;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restriction on the food of the, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Virbialis, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flaminica, rules of life for the, i. 117, 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flanders, midsummer bonfires in, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Flemish cure for ague, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flax-pullers, custom of the, i. 375</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florence, <q>sawing the old woman</q> in, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florida, sacrifice of the firstborn by the Indians of, i. 236, 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Folk tales, resurrection in, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Food, unconsumed, buried, i. 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prohibited food, i. 207, 208;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>strong food, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forests, Europe covered with, in prehistoric times, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fors, the, of Central Africa, preservation of nail parings by the, i. 204, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forsaken sleeper, i. 96</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foulahs of Senegambia spare the crocodile, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, harvest customs in the northeast of, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franche Comté, harvest customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankish kings not allowed to cut their hair, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friedingen, harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friesland, harvest customs in East, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frog-flayer, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Funeral custom, i. 129, 130</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fürstenwalde, harvest ceremonies in, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gablingen, harvest customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galela, ceremony at the initiation of boys amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galicia, harvest customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gall-bladder the special seat of courage amongst the Chinese, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gareloch, Dumbartonshire, harvest customs on some farms on the, i. 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garos, rain-charm used by the, i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Georgia, rain-charm in, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany&mdash;German peasants and a whirlwind, i. 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred groves common amongst the ancient Germans, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony on felling a tree, i. 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rain-charm, i. 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
after a death, i. 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition regarding the knife, i. 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning hair cutting, i. 196, 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, i. 337, 345, 374, 375; ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest cries, i. 408, 409;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>way to free a garden from caterpillars, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beating as a charm, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak the sacred tree, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak log burnt on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in German stories, ii. <ref target='Pg310'>310-312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gervasius, rain spring mentioned by, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghosts, the soul carried off by, i. 129-132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of the ghosts of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giant, sham, procession and burning of the, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280-282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilgit, ceremony on felling a tree in, i. 65;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred cedar of, i. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilyak sacrifice of the bear, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105-107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girls secluded at puberty, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225-247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238-242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch the ground or see the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225-253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces in folk tales of the rule which forbids girls at puberty to see the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235-237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goat, the, sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dionysus as a, i. 326-328; ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34-37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12-19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, killing the, i. 213; ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218-222</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killing a god in animal form, i. 327, 328;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>motives for killing the god, i. 214-216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God's Mouth, the name of the supreme ruler of the old Prussians, i. 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gods die and are buried, i. 213, 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; incarnate, slain, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218-222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gold Coast, sacrifices of the negroes of the, i. 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their superstition with regard to iron, i. 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golden Bough, Turner's picture of the, i. 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legend of the, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the representative of the tree-spirit, i. 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between heaven and earth, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223-243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what was it, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Golden Bough is the mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why was the mistletoe called the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Golden Bough an emanation of the sun's fire, ii. <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goldi sacrifice of the bear, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gommern, harvest festival at, i. 370</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gonds, human sacrifices by the, i. 252, 384;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mock-human sacrifices, i. 252;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scapegoats amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good Friday custom, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gout transferred from a man to a tree, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grand Lama, death and reappearance of the, i. 42, 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the shadow of Sankara, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grandmother, a name given to the last sheaf, i. 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Granny, a name given to the last sheaf, i. 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grass king, i. 91-93, 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grätz, midsummer custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, rain-making in, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree worship in, i. 58, 59, 99;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals of the Greeks, i. 99, 100, 103;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the laying of a foundation stone in, i. 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificial ritual in, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats in, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210-217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Greek stories, ii. <ref target='Pg305'>305-307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green George, i. 84-86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grenoble, May Day in, i. 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grihya-Sûtras, provision in the, for the burning of cut hair, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grossvargula, Whitsuntide custom in, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ground, sacred persons not allowed to touch the, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls at puberty not allowed to touch the, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225-253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred things may not touch the, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grüneberg, harvest ceremony in, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guanches, rain-charm in, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guatemala, the nagual amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guaycurus and storms, i. 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guinea, secreting of cut hair and nails in, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual expulsion of the devil by the negroes of, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time of licence in, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guyenne, harvest ceremony in, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hack-thorn, sacred, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadeln, reaping custom in the district of, i. 333</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haida Indian wind-charm, i. 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hair, burning of loose, i. 205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burning after child-birth, i. 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut hair deposited in a safe place, i. 200-205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cutting, i. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>most sacred day of the year appointed for hair cutting, i. 197;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the cutting of the, i. 196, 198, 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut only during a storm, i. 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>haircutting as a disinfectant, i. 206, 207;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic use of cut hair, i. 198, 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>strength supposed to be in the, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair not cut, i. 193-195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition about cutting the hair and nails, i. 193-207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halberstadt, human scapegoats in, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halibut, festival in honour of the, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>

<lg>
<l>Halmahera, rain-making in, i. 13, 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hampstead, forest of, i. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harran, ritual observed by the heathen Syrians of, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvest child, a name given to the last sheaf, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cock, a name given to the last sheaf, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cries, i. 404-409</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs, i. 333-347, 352, 353, 367-381, 408; ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4-27</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68-73</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival, i. 169; ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374-376</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382-384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; goat, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; maiden, a prototype of Proserpine, i. 356</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; May, i. 68, 69, 81, 82; ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; omens, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; queen, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; songs and cries, ii. <ref target='Pg364'>364-366</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404-409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harz Mountains, Easter fires in the, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawaii, detention of the soul in, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>capital offences in, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hay family, the, and the mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Head, sanctity of the, i. 187-193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the washing of the, i. 188</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headache, transference of, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headington, May-day custom at, i. 94, 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heaven, the Golden Bough between heaven and earth, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223-243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrides, representation of spring in the, i. 97</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heligoland, disappearance of the herring from, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbrechtingen, threshing custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercynian forest, i. 56, 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hereford, sin eaters in, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herefordshire, midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermsdorf, harvest custom in, i. 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodotus, story by, of the wind fighters of Psylli, i. 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herring, disappearance of the, from
Heligoland, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hertfordshire harvest custom, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hessen, Ash Wednesday custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sowing-time customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hidatsa Indians, belief in the plurality of souls amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierapolis, pigs sacred at, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Himalayas, scapegoats in the Western, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoo cure for the murrain, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Ingathering, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls and puberty, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Hindoo stories, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298-302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoos, the, test of a suitable sacrificial victim, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hindoos and yawning, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of nail cutting by the, i. 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival at the eating of the new rice by the, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoo Koosh, smoke from the sacred tree inhaled by the sybil, i. 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood sucking the test of a diviner amongst the, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippolytus, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holland, Whitsuntide custom in, i. 88;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter fires, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holstein, reaping custom in, i. 333;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>healing effects of the mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hornkampe, harvest custom in, i. 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24-26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of the, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horses excluded from the Arician grove, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Virbius, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62-64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hos, harvest festival amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time of licence with the, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offering of first-fruits by the, ii. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hottentot priests do not use iron, i. 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wind-charm, i. 27, 28;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheep driven through the fire by the, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hovas of Madagascar, offerings of first-fruits by the, ii. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>How, coffer of Osiris at, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huahine, offerings of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huitzilopochtli, dough image of the Mexican god, made and eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human sacrifices, i. 235-237, 251, 252, 381;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>replaced by mock sacrifices, i. 250-253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; victim represents the corn-spirit, i. 390-395</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hungary, Whitsuntide custom in, i. 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Hungarian stories, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunger, expulsion of, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunting the wren, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140-144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurons, the, and fish bones, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their idea of the soul, i. 122;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving away sickness amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huskanaw, the name of an initiatory ceremony amongst the Indians of Virginia, ii. <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hylæ, sacred men inspired by the image of Apollo at, i. 37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibo, king of, confined to his premises, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>

<lg>
<l>Iddah, king of, asserts that he is god, i. 41, 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ihlozi, the, of the Zulus, ii. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incarnate gods, i. 30-54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incarnation, temporary and permanent, i. 32, 37-42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incas of Peru revered as gods, i. 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preservation of cut hair and parings of the nails of the, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restrictions upon the prince who is to become Inca of Peru, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony for the expulsion of diseases, etc. by the, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167-169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indersdorf, harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, devil dancer drinks sacrificial blood in Southern, i. 34;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human gods in, i. 41, 42;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage of shrubs and trees in, i. 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin eating in, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iron used as a charm in, i. 175, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in the Central Provinces of, i. 371, 372;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom during cholera in Central Provinces of, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians of Alaska, preservation of cut hair by the, i. 201, 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Arizona offer human sacrifices, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Guayaquil sacrifice human beings at seed time, i. 381</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Guiana, treatment of girls at puberty by the, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232-234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Peru and their fish gods, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Virginia, initiatory ceremony amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Influenza, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Initiatory rites, simulation of death and resurrection at, ii. <ref target='Pg342'>342-358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innuit of Alaska, custom after a death amongst the, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspiration, i. 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by blood drinking, i. 34, 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by use of sacred tree, i. 35; 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspired men, i. 36, 37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; victims, i. 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irayas of Luzon, offerings of first-fruits by the, ii. <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, May Day in the south-east of, i. 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hunting the wren at Christmas in, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron, superstitious aversion to, i. 172-174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a charm, i. 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron-Beard, Dr., i. 249, 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iroquois, ceremony at the festival of dreams by the, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scapegoat used by the, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time of licence amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis, acorn goddess, i. 310, 311;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>named the moon by the aboriginal inhabitants of Egypt, i. 311;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a cow, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isle of Man, wind selling in the, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hunting the wren at Christmas in the, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer bonfires, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Issapoo, the cobra capella the guardian deity of the negroes of, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Istar, legend concerning the goddess, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italones, cannibalism by the, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, tree worship in ancient, i. 58, 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of <q>sawing the old woman</q> in, i. 261, 262;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of Adonis in, i. 294;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak the sacred tree in, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Italian stories, ii. <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Itonamas, the, and the soul, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Itzgrund, harvest custom in, i. 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ivy girl, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jack-in-the-green, i. 88, 89, 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jambi, temporary kings in, i. 231, 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japanese, expulsion of evil spirits by the, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jarkino, belief in animate trees in, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Javanese and rice bloom, i. 60, 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at rice harvest, i. 355;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Javanese and the soul, i. 124, 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerome of Prague, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeypur, scapegoat used in cases of smallpox in, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jubilee, i. 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter represented by an oak on the Capitol at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaffa, worship of human god in, i. 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kafir boys at circumcision, i. 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New Year festival, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elephant hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burying of cut hair and nails by the Kafirs, i. 202, 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kakian Association, ii. <ref target='Pg354'>354-357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kakongo, king of, not allowed to touch certain European goods, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not seen eating, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalamba, ceremonies on a visit to, by subject chiefs, i. 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalmucks, consecration of the white ram by the, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamant tribe do not allow a natural death, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamtchatkans excuse themselves before killing land or sea animals, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respect the seal and sea lion, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kânagrâ, spring custom in, i. 276, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kángrá, custom at, on the death of a Rajah, i. 232;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin eaters in, ii. 156</l>
</lg>

<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>

<lg>
<l>Karens, funeral custom by the, i. 129, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of the soul in Karen, i. 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dread of women's blood by the, i. 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief concerning the head, i. 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at rice sowing, i. 354, 355</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karma tree, i. 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karoks of California and salmon catching, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kasyas, expulsion of devils by the, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Katodis, ceremony before felling a tree by the, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kent, the ivy girl in, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keramin tribe of New South Wales, rain-making by the, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Key Islanders, soul superstition amongst the, i. 130, 131;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of sickness by the, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khonds, human sacrifices by the, i. 384-390;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rain-charm, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils by the, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kibanga, kings killed in, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kilema, ceremony in, before a stranger is allowed to see the king, i. 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kilimanjaro Mount, believed to be tenanted by demons, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kimbunda, cannibalism amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King Hop, the title of a temporary king, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the calf, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the May, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the sacred rites, i. 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Wood, i. 1-108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why so called, i. 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>never a temporal sovereign, i. 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an incarnation of the tree spirit, i. 106-108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probability that he was formerly slain annually, i. 240, 241;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>similarity to North European personages, i. 249, 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a personification of the oak, ii. <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probably burned in a fire of oak wood, ii. <ref target='Pg363'>363-365</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings&mdash;as gods, i. 8;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to control the weather, i. 44-46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punished for the failure of crops, i. 46-48;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed, i. 48;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine, i. 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of nature, i. 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of fire, i. 53-56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of rain, i, 52, 53;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of water, i. 53-56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine, cease to govern, i. 118, 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abdicate, i. 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarded against strangers, i. 158, 159;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>veiled, i. 162, 163;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at meals, i. 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confined to their palaces, i. 164, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed when they show signs of decay, i. 217-223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed at expiry of fixed term, i. 223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mitigation of the above rule, kings allowed to defend themselves, i. 224;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed annually, i. 225-227;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary, i. 228-234;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary kings sometimes hereditary, i. 228, 232;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sons sacrificed in times of great danger, i. 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingsmill Islands, offerings of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirn, the name of a harvest supper, i. 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klausenburg, harvest custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kloxin, harvest ceremony in, i. 369</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knives, reluctance to use, after a death, i. 176, 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kobi, offering of first-fruits by the, ii. <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kochs of Assam, offerings of first-fruits by the, ii. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kohlerwinkel, harvest ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kolosh Indians, seclusion of girls amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koniags, seclusion of girls amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Königshain, driving out Death in, i. 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Konkan, scapegoat used in Southern, in cases of cholera, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Konz, midsummer fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kostroma, funeral of, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kostrubonko, i. 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kukulu, the priest king, i. 112, 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kumis, driving away small-pox by the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kupalo, funeral of, i. 272;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representation of, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kupole's festival, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lachlin family and the deer, ii. <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Ciotat, hunting the wren in, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lada, funeral of, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lagos, human sacrifices at, i. 383</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lakor, expulsion of diseases to sea in, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamas, Grand, i. 42, 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the chief of the, i. 43, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamb killed sacramentally by the Madi tribe of Central Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamps, festival of, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laos, precautions against strangers in, i. 152;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in plurality of souls amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laosia, women worshippers in, i. 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Palisse, harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lapis manalis, i. 22</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lappland, wind selling in, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the sacrifice of an animal in, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of women in, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larch-tree, sacred, i. 61, 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lazy man, the, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lechrain, midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<lg>
<l>Leipzig, carrying out the effigy of Death in, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lent customs, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247-249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leopard, ceremony at the killing of a, ii. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leper, custom at the cleansing of a, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lerwick wind-sellers, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leti, expulsion of diseases to sea by the, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leucadian scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewis, wind selling in the island of, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lhoosai, harvest festival of the, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libchowic, Mid-Lent custom in the neighbourhood of, i. 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licence, periods of, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life of a person bound up with that of a plant, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328-330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life plants, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lille, harvest ceremonies at, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Linus, the name given to the Phoenician lament at vintage time, i. 365</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; song, i. 398, 399</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; identified with Adonis, i. 399</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion, ceremony at the killing of a, ii. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arabic belief in the properties of lion's fat, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lithuania, sun worshippers in, i. 24, 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree worshippers in, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the felling of sacred groves in, i. 66, 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>May customs in, i. 83, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom after a funeral in, i. 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 340, 341;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at threshing time in, i. 372, 373;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies by the peasants at the eating of the new corn in, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Little leaf man, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lityerses compared with harvest customs, i. 366, 367;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of, i. 392-395;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation of, to Attis, i. 396, 397</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the name given to a song by the Phrygian reapers, i. 365, 366</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liver, the, thought to be the seat of the soul, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livonia, sacred grove in, i. 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Llandebie, sin eating in, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loango, king of, deposed when the harvest fails, i. 47;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supernaturally endowed kings of, i. 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a capital offence to see the king eat, i. 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the king confined to his palace after coronation, i. 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>food left by the king buried, i. 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>food restrictions in, i. 207, 208;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls secluded at puberty in, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>London, midsummer pageants in, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Longnor, harvest custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lost children, superstition concerning, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loucheux Indians, abstinence from the sinew of the thigh by the, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luchon, midsummer fire ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lumley, Sir J., excavation of the site of the Diana Nemorensis by, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lüneberg, harvest custom in, i. 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lusatia, ceremony of carrying out Death in, i. 259, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M'Bengas, life of a child supposed to be bound up with that of a tree by the, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macusis of British Guiana, treatment of girls at the age of puberty by the, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madagascar, power ascribed to the souls of the dead in, i. 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood of nobles may not be shed in, i. 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crocodile not killed in, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madenassana bushmen, the goat sacred to the, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madi tribe, burying of the parings of the nails by the, i. 202;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lamb killed sacramentally by the, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magic, sympathetic, i. 9-12</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; use of cut hair, i. 198-200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maiden, a name given to the last handful of corn, i. 344, 345</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maize, mother of the, i. 350-352</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makololo, burning or burying of cut hair by the, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malabar, reverence for the cow in, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malagasy, vehicle used by the, for the transference of ills, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malay poem, the external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malays and the soul, i. 124; ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>do not touch a man's head, i. 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maldives, cuttings from the hair and nails buried by the natives of the, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mamilian tower, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mamurius Veturius or the old Mars, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208-210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man in cow-skin, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; gods in the South Sea Islands, i. 38, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandan Indians, and their portraits, i. 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils by the, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maneros, the name given to the lament of the Egyptian reapers at the cutting of the first sheaf, i. 364</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mangaia, priests called gods in, i. 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spiritual and temporal government
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
in, i. 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of a warrior's shadow, i. 142, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man-god, two types of, i. 12</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mania, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Manii, there are many at Aricia,</q> explanation of the proverb, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manius Egerius, traditional founder of the Arician Grove, etc., i. 5; ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maori ceremonies on entering strange territory, i. 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Maoris and dead bodies, i. 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of the blood of women, i. 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacredness of the head amongst the, i. 191, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at hair cutting, i. 196, 197;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fishing custom, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mare, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24-26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marimos, human sacrifices by the, i. 383, 384</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marktl, harvest ceremonies in the neighbourhood of, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marquesas Islands, men deified in their life-time in the, i. 37, 38;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Marquesans and the soul, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shaving of the head in the, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mars, chariot race on the field of, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64-66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the old, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208-210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marseilles, human scapegoat in, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masuren, midsummer fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May bride, i. 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day carols, i. 75, 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day customs, i. 72-86, 88, 89, 94, 95, 98-101; ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; king, i. 90, 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; poles, i. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 230, 308; ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; queen, i. 93, 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sleeping bridegroom of, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; trees, i. 74-82, 90, 91, 243, 247, 268, 269; ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayenne, May Day custom in, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mecklenburg, reaping custom in, i. 376</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meiningen, Ash Wednesday custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sowing time custom, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanesia, sunshine making in, i. 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bringing back the soul in, i. 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Melanesian stones and a man's shadow, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meleager, ii. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Men eaten to obtain their qualities, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menstruation, seclusion of women at periods of, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238-242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menstruous blood, primitive dread of, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mentawej Islands, precautions against strangers in the, i. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meroe, Ethiopian kings of, killed, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metz, midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexican sacraments, paste images of the god eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79-82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80-84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexico, oath of kings at accession in, i. 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of new-born babes in, i. 307;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifice at harvest festival in, i. 381;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incarnate gods slain in, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218-222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miaotse, ceremony of driving away the devil by the, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mice, charm for ridding lands from, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mid-Lent customs, i. 82, 93, 254, 261-263, 268, 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midsummer customs, i. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 89, 101, 272, 290-294; ii. <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; European fire festivals at, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258-267</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burning of effigies in the midsummer fires, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve superstitions, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic plants gathered on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286-288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; omens, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mikado, description of the life of the, i. 110-112;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cooking of his food, i. 166, 167;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of wearing his clothes without leave, i. 167;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cutting his hair and nails, i. 197;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch the ground, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miklucho-Maclay, Baron, ceremony on his entering a village on the Maclay coast, i. 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milkmen worshipped by the Todas, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minahassa, rain-charm used by the, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blood drinking at festivals by the, i. 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom in time of sickness, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving away devils by the, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mingrelia, rain-getting in, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minnetaree Indians and the resurrection of the bison, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miris, tree superstition of the, i. 63;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tiger's flesh eaten by the, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mirrors, covering up of, i. 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mistletoe, the, worshipped by the Celts and gathered by the Druids, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered on Midsummer Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>qualities of, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>viewed as the seat of life, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of the oak in the, ii. <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch the ground, ii. <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a protection against witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Golden Bough the, ii. <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason it was called the Golden Bough, ii. <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why called golden, ii. <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divining rods made from, in
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
Sweden, ii. <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gathered at midsummer and Christmas, ii. <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithraic mysteries, ii. <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mnevis, the bull, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moa, expulsion of diseases to sea by the, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mock executions, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; human sacrifices, i. 250-253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mole, Le, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moluccas, festivals in the, i. 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of clove-trees in blossom in the, i. 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul abduction in the, i. 133, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony in the, after a journey, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mondard, the great, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongolians, stuffing the skin of a sacrificed animal by the, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongols, the, and the soul, i. 128</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monomotapa, precautions taken for the king of, i. 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montalto, Mid Lent custom in, i. 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mooris, custom at births by the, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moosheim, fire festival at, ii. <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moqui Indians, belief in the transmigration of human souls into turtles held by the, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totem clans of the, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moresby, Captain, at Shepherd's Isle, i. 152, 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morocco, iron a protection against demons in, i. 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ants eaten in, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diverting evil spirits in, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mother-cotton, the, i. 353</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the maize, i. 350-352</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Motumotu theory of storms, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the soul believed to be in the reflection by the, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mowat, the chief of, supposed to have power of affecting crops, etc., i. 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boys beaten to make them grow in, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mozcas, weather kings of the, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muato Jamwo, a capital offence to see him eat, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mundaris, sacred groves of the, i. 63;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the felling of sacred groves, i. 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest festival, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mundas, ceremony at the planting of the rice by the, i. 288, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Munster, rain fountain in, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Münsterland, Easter fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murrain, cure for the, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murrams of Manipur, restrictions of food among the, i. 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muyscas, weather kings of the, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nagual, the, of the Indians of Guatemala, ii. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nails, cutting the, i. 195, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burying the first cuttings of a child's, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cuttings of, preserved, i. 202-205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namaquas, foods eaten and rejected by the, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nanumea, precautions against strangers in the island of, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narrinyeri and their totems, i. 165, 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nass River, Indians of the, and the recall of the soul, i. 140, 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natchez, harvest festival by the, ii. <ref target='Pg382'>382-384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature, kings of, i. 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dependence of, upon the divine king, i. 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nauders, sacred larch-tree at, i. 61, 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naudowessies, initiatory ceremony amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navarre, rain-making in, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ndembo, the, ii. <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Need fires, ii. <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Negro idea of the soul, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nemi, lake of, i. 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree within the sanctuary, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest of, i. 249, 253, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unchanged, ii. <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nerechta, Whitsuntide customs in, i. 96</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neuautz, custom at barley sowing in, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neuhausen, harvest custom in, i. 370</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neusaass, harvest custom in, i. 337</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Britain, rain-making in, i. 13, 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wind-charm, i. 26;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving away evil in, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils in, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiation ceremony in, ii. <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Caledonia, rain-making in, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm for making sunshine in, i. 22-24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New fruits etc. eaten sacramentally, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68-79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Guinea, seclusion of girls in, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Ireland, seclusion of girls in, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226-228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New South Wales, ceremony of initiation in, i. 163;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-born eaten in, i. 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Year's Day customs, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Zealand, sacredness of blood in, i. 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the head, i. 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hair cutting in, i. 197, 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>clippings from the hair buried in, i. 200;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of sacred contagion in, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gods, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nias, the people of, and the soul, i. 122, 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions against strangers in, i. 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>succession in, i. 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slaves sacrificed at the funeral
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
of a chief in, i. 251;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exorcising the devil in, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scapegoats in, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicobar Islands, ceremony in cases of epidemic in the, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils in the, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nightjar, the, ii. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nisus, King of Megara, ii. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nootka Indians, ceremony by the, at the killing of a bear, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiatory ceremony by the, ii. <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nördlingen, threshing custom in, i. 371</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norse stories, the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North American Indians, their idea with regard to strangers, i. 153;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restrictions upon women at certain times, i. 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cleansing after the slaying of enemies, i. 170, 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abstinence from blood, i. 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nail cutting amongst the, i. 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief concerning the various properties of food, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spare the rattlesnake, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at bear killing, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respect for the elan, deer and elk, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regard for the bones of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northamptonshire, May-day custom in, i. 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cure for cough, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norway, cut hair and nails buried or burned in, i. 205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer bonfires in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nürnberg, ceremony of carrying out Death in, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oak worship, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the chief sacred tree of the European Aryans, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291-370</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred fires made of, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oak wood burnt on Midsummer Day, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Balder is the, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human representative of the, slain, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294-296</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life of, in the mistletoe, ii. <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the oak tree, ii. <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a store of solar fire, ii. <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oats-goat, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13-15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obermedlingen, threshing custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oberpfalz, threshing custom in, i. 371</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>October horse, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64-67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Offerings of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg373'>373-384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oil of St. John, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ojebways, sunshine charm used by the, i. 22;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seldom fell living trees, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olaf, King of Sweden, sacrificed, i. 47, 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old Calabar, revellings at the expulsion of devils in, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old man, a name given to the last sheaf, i. 337, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old woman, a name given to the last sheaf, i. 337, 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldenburg, superstition regarding the reflection in, i. 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom with regard to clippings from the hair in, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omaha Indians, rain-making by the, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wind clan of the Omahas, i. 26;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their totems, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omens, neutralising bad, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onitsha, ceremony of eating the new yams at, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New Year festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats in, ii. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oraon festival, i. 85, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oraons, ceremony at rice planting by the, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orchomenus, human sacrifice at the rites of Dionysus in, i. 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oregon, belief in the recall of the soul by the Salish Indians of, i. 136, 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orestes, the originator of the worship of Diana, i. 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orinoco rain-charm, i. 18, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sunshine charm, i. 22</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orissa, worshippers of the Queen of England in, i. 41;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rice growing in, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orkney Islands, transference of sickness in the, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris, myth of, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual of, i. 303-305;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representation of the dead body of, in the temple of Isis, i. 305;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a corn-spirit, i. 305-307;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a tree-spirit, i. 307-309;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grave of, at Philae, i. 309;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arguments for and against his being the sun-god, i. 311-313, 316, 317, 318, 320;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a god of vegetation, i. 319;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, similar to those of Dionysus and Adonis, i. 319, 320;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>probable origin of the cult of, i. 363;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>once represented by a human victim, i. 400-404;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on monuments, i. 403;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>key to the mysteries of, i. 404;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a pig, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52-60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death of, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual sacrifice of a pig to, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a bull, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59-61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osnabrück, harvest custom in, i. 336</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osterode, Easter fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ostiaks, ceremony by the, at the killing of a bear, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ot Damons, custom with regard to strangers by the, i. 151, 152;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of girls amongst the, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otawa Indians, ceremony at the killing of a bear by the, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>do not burn fish bones, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oude, sin eating in, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owl, the, ii. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ox, ritual at the Athenian sacrifice of the, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as an embodiment
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
of the corn-spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41-43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris and the, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59-61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ozieri, Gardens of Adonis at, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pacific, human gods in the, i. 38, 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pádams of Assam, superstition concerning lost children by the, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palermo, <q>sawing the old woman</q> in, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palm-tree, the Dyaks and the, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sunday custom, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pan, representation of, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Lord of the Wood, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panes, festival of the, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papuans, foods eaten by the, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in a child's life being bound up with that of a tree, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paris, procession of mock giant in, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parthian monarchs worshipped as deities, i. 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patagonians, burning of loose hair by the, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pawnees, human sacrifices by the, at sowing, i. 381, 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Payaguas, method of fighting the wind by the, i. 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pear-tree, the protector of cattle, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelew Islanders, god of the, i. 39, 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at tree-felling by the, i. 62, 63;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony on the killing of a man by the, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pembrokeshire, Twelfth Day custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepper Coast, high priest held responsible for the general welfare, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Permanent incarnation, i. 37-42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persian kings not seen eating, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peru, rain-charm in, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm for staying the sun in, i. 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preservation of the representative corn-spirit by the ancient Peruvians, i. 350, 351;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of devils in, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-beating in, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also under</hi> Incas.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippine Islands, belief in the souls of trees in the, i. 62;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannibalism in the, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy, primitive, defect of, i. 210-212;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules of life of sacred men are the outcome of, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phoenician custom at vintage, i. 365;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Linus song, i. 398, 399</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygia, mock human sacrifices in, i. 300;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reapers' song in, i. 365, 366</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piedmont, midsummer peasant custom in, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26-31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50-57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris as a, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52-60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigs, Demeter and Proserpine as, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44-49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Attis and Adonis as, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilsen, Whitsuntide custom near, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pine-tree sacred to Dionysus, i. 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pinsk, Whit Monday customs by Russian girls in, i. 87, 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plas, Whitsuntide custom in the neighbourhood of, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Po, excavations in the valley of the, i. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poachers and the fir-cones, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Point Barrow, hunting the evil spirit by the Eskimo of, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poitou, midsummer fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poland, ceremony of carrying out Death in, i. 261;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 339, 340, 342, 343;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christmas custom in, ii. 6, 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polynesians, superstition held by the, concerning the head, i. 189, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sacred contagion, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomerania, cut hair buried in, i. 205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reaping custom in, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomos of California, expulsions of devils by the, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pongol festival, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pont à Mousson, harvest ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poplar, burning of a, on St. Peter's Day, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portrait, the soul in the, i. 148, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portraits, life in, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potato-dog, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; wolf, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potatoes, custom at the digging of new, in Sutherlandshire, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potniae, rites of Dionysus at, i. 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pouilly, harvest ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preacher to the fish, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pregnancy, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestly kings, i. 7, 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests, Roman and Sabine, not shaved with iron razors, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primitive man and the supernatural, i. 6-30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; philosophy, rules of life are the outcome of, i. 208-210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophesying, drinking blood before, i. 34, 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propitiation of the fish, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proserpine and the pig, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44-49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussia, reverence for the oak in, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>high trees worshipped by the ancient Prussians, i. 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom after a funeral by the old Prussians, i. 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-immolation of the supreme ruler of the old Prussians, i. 223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at spring ploughing in, i. 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn drenching in, i. 287;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
Adonis in, i. 294, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 336, 338, 343;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the sowing of the winter corn by the Prussian Slavs, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puberty, girls at, not allowed to touch the ground or see the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225-253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls secluded at, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for the seclusion, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pulverbatch, oak tree superstition at, ii. <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punjaub, Gen. Nicholson worshipped by a sect in the, i. 41;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at the bursting of the cotton boles in the, i. 353;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at the festival of lamps, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purification after travel, i. 157, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyrenees, customs in the, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quauhtitlans, human sacrifices by the, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen of the sacred rites, i. 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queensland, initiatory rites in, ii. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quilacare, self-immolation of the king of, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quoja, initiatory rites in, ii. <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra, the sun-god, i. 313-316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rain-charm, i. 93, 199, 287, 289, 299, 333, 374, 390, 400; ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings of, i. 52, 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; making, i. 13-22</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rajah, custom at the death of a, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rajah Vijyanagram, his aversion to iron, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rajamahall, offerings of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rali fair, the, i. 276, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ram, sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian sacrifice of the, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92-94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecration of the white ram by the Kalmucks, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramin, harvest custom in, i. 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raskolniks, the, and mirrors, i. 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rattlesnake not killed, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ratzeburg, harvest custom in, i. 376, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Red cock, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; haired victims, i. 306, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reflection, the soul in the, i. 145-148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion, marks of a primitive, i. 348, 349</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and magic, relation of, i. 30-32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious aspect of Peruvian, Parthian and Egyptian sovereigns, i. 48-50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection, the, of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123-125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces in folk-tales of the belief in, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>simulation of death and resurrection at initiatory rites, ii. <ref target='Pg342'>342-358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhetra, priest tastes the sacrificial blood at, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhön mountains, fire festivals in the, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rice-bride, the, i. 355</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rice harvest, ceremonies at the, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rio de la Plata, seclusion of girls amongst the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman cure for fever, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; haircutting custom, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans, tree worship by the, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, ceremony of driving out the old Mars from, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208-210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romove, sacred oak at, i. 58, 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rook, expulsion of evil in the island of, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>initiation festival, ii. <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosenheim, harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roti, haircutting ceremony in the island of, i. 201, 205, 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rottenburg, midsummer ceremony in, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roumanians, rain-making by the, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom after a death by the, i. 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-drenching by the, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowan, the, effective against witchcraft, ii. <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Royal and priestly taboos, i. 109-120, 149-209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; blood not spilt upon the ground, i. 179-183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruhla, springtide custom in, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rupture, cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russia, Whitsuntide customs in, i. 76, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-born sacrificed by the heathen in, i. 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eastertide customs in Little Russia, i. 272, 273;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 341;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony on the cutting of the first sheaf in, i. 364;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter custom in White Russia, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Russian wood-spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Russian corn-spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beating as a charm in, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruthenia, fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rye-boar, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; goat, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; wolf, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1-3</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabaea, kings of, not allowed out of their palaces, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabarios, festival of, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sables, superstition about killing, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacaea festival at Babylon, i. 226, 400</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacramental bread, traces of the use of, at Aricia, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82-84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; character of the harvest supper, corn-spirit eaten in animal form, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; killing of an animal, two types of the, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>

<lg>
<l>Sacramental killing of sacred animal by pastoral peoples, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135-138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacraments in ancient Mexico, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred cattle in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; persons' vessels not to be used by others, i. 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred persons are dangerous, i. 166, 167;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to see the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to touch the ground, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacredness and uncleanness not distinguished by primitive man, i. 169-172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices, human, i. 235-237, 251, 252</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrificial king, i. 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saddle Island, the reflection and the soul in the, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saffron Walden, May-day custom in, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sagar, influenza in, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saligné, harvest custom in, i. 343</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salii, the, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmon-catching, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salza district, Shrove Tuesday custom in the, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salzwedel, Whitsuntide custom in, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoan gods, i. 39; ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoans, the, and bleeding trees, i. 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recall of the soul amongst the, i. 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>turtle not eaten by the, i. 163;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoans and the butterfly, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presentation of first-fruits by the, ii. <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samogitians, tree superstition amongst the, i. 65;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>birds and beasts of the wood held sacred by the, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samorin kings, i. 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoyed story, the external soul in a, ii. <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sankara and his shadow, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santals, story of a soul by the, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardinia, Gardens of Adonis in, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satyrs, representation of the, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, our debt to the, i. 210-212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage Island, kings killed in the, i. 48;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>collapse of the monarchy in the, i. 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killing of strangers in the, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savages and the soul, i. 121, 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sawing the old woman,</q> i. 261, 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxon villages, Whitsuntide custom in, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxons of Transylvania, charm for keeping sparrows from the corn used by the, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxony, Whitsuntide ceremonies in, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scandinavian Christmas custom, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182-217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>animal employed as a, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189-191</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dog used as a, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tibetan ceremony of the, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199-201</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cow and bull as, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of, in classical antiquity, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208-217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for beating the, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213-215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schaumburg, Easter fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schluckenau, Shrovetide custom in, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, representation of spring in the Highlands of, i. 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iron as a charm in, i. 175, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 339, 345;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cowherd clothed in cow's hide in the Highlands of, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythian kings put in bonds in times of scarcity, i. 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sea-lion, respect for the, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seal, respect for the, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-immolation, i. 216, 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semites, sacrifice of children by the, i. 235;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the king's son sacrificed, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of Adonis, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senegambia, the Python clan in, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul detention among the Sereres of, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senjero, first-born sacrificed in, i. 236, 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servia, rain-making in, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torchlight procession in, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seven Oaks, May-day custom in, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sex-totems in Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg334'>334-337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shadow, the soul in the, i. 141-149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamans, the, sacrifice their chief on account of pestilence, i. 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shans, expulsion of the fire-spirit by the, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shark Point the home of the priestly King Kukulu, i. 112</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sharp instruments supposed to wound spirits, i. 176, 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheaf, the last, various names given to, and ceremonies in connection with, i. 336-338, 340-346, 408; ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shepherd's Isle, precautions taken against strangers in, i. 152, 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shetland seamen and wind buying, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shropshire, <q>Neck</q> the name given to the last handful of corn in, i. 407, 408;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sin-eating in, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shrovetide Bear, i. 254, 255</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs, i. 96, 244, 270; ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254-257</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siam, soul superstition in, i. 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of royal executions in, i. 179, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the head, i. 187, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary king of, i. 229;</l>
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>banishment of demons in, ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human scapegoats in, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Siamese story, ii. <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siberian sable hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicily, Gardens of Adonis in, i. 294, 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silenus both a wood and corn spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representation of, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silesia, driving out Death in, i. 260;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>carrying out Death</q> in, i. 267;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bringing back summer in, i. 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 336, 346; ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silvanus both a wood and corn spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin-bearers, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin-eating, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154-157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sinew which shrank,</q> abstinence from the, ii. <ref target='Pg126'>126-128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skye, harvest festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beltane fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slaves sacrificed, i. 251, 252</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavonia, <q>carrying out Death</q> in, i. 260; ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of <q>sawing the old woman</q> amongst the Slavs, i. 262;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reaping custom amongst the Slavs, i. 334, 355;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beating in, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perpetual fire of the Slavs, ii. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in Slavonic stories, ii. <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slovenes of Oberkrain, Shrove Tuesday custom amongst the, i. 96</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Small-pox, driving away the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scapegoat used for, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snake, communion with the, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony performed with a dough snake by the, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soest, custom of flax pullers at, i. 375</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sofala, kings of, killed, i. 219, 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sogamoso, restrictions on the heir to the throne in, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solör, harvest custom in, i. 375</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Somersetshire, midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorcerers, the soul extracted or detained by, i. 135-141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul, perils of the, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a miniature of the body, i. 121-123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions to prevent its escape, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived as a bird, i. 124;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its flight, i. 124, 125;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absent in sleep, i. 125-129;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its departure not always voluntary, i. 129;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried off by ghosts, i. 129-132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recall of the, i. 129-141;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stolen by demons, i. 132-135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought back in visible shape, i. 136-138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extracted or detained by sorcerers, i. 138-141;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transference of the, i. 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the soul thought to be in the portrait, i. 148, 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the shadow, i. 141-149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the reflection, i. 145-148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the blood, i. 178, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of the human soul into that of a turtle, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the external soul in folk tales, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296-326</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in folk custom, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327-359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Souls, of trees, i. 59-61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of divine persons transmitted to successors, i. 237-239;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>plurality of, ii. <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South American Indians, foods eaten and avoided by the, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beating by the, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South Sea Islands, man-gods in the, i. 38, 39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowing-time custom, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28-30</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spachendorf, fire festivals in, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, custom of <q>sawing the old woman</q> in, i. 261, 262;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sparrows, the, and the corn, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sparta, state sacrifices offered by the kings of, i. 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spices, sprinkling the sick with, i. 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit, of vegetation, in human shape, i. 87, 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; robbing the, i. 380</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirits, sharp instruments supposed to wound, i. 176, 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spitting as a protective charm, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spring and harvest customs compared, i. 346, 347</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ceremony in, in China, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>European fire festivals in, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247-254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Storms, Motumotu theory of, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strangers, precautions against the magic arts of, i. 150-160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tied up in the sheaves by the reapers as representatives of the corn-spirit, i. 374-380</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Straw goats, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sucla-Tirtha, expulsion of sins to sea by the, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suicide of Fijians at old age, i. 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumatra, rain-charm in, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tree-superstition in, i. 63;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reluctance to wound a tiger in, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summer, bringing back, i. 263, 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tree, i. 268, 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun, staying the, i. 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred person not allowed to see the, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls at puberty not allowed to see the, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225-253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces in folktales of the rule which forbids girls at puberty to see the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235-237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief that the sun can impregnate women, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tabooed persons may not see the, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fires as sun charms, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267-274</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>

<lg>
<l>Suni Mohammedans, covering up mirrors by the, i. 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunshine, making, i. 22-24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superb warbler, ii. <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Surenthal, midsummer fire ceremony in the, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Surinam, the bush negroes of, and their totems, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutherland, cure for cough in, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutherlandshire, custom at the digging of new potatoes in, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swabia, burying of cut hair in, i. 202;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burying the carnival in, i. 254-257;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire festival, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248-249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>; midsummer fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweden, harvest superstition in, i. 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>King Domalde sacrificed on account of famine, i. 47, 48;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>May Eve customs in, i. 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer ceremonies, i. 78, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christmas customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29-31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitious use of Yule straw in, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>May Day fires in, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer bonfires in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mistletoe superstition in, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divining rods made from the mistletoe in, ii. <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swineherds, restrictions on, in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syleus, legend of, i. 398</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sympathetic eating, Savage belief that a man acquires the character of the animal or man whose flesh he eats, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85-89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; magic, i. 9-12</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, caterpillars in, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taboo, i. 121, 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatal effects of, i. 167-170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seclusion of tabooed persons, i. 170, 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the object of, is to preserve life, i. 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>royal and priestly taboos, i. 109-120, 149-150, 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabor, in Bohemia, ceremony of carrying out Death in, i. 258</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahiti, abdication of kings of, i. 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the bodies of the king and queen not allowed to be touched, i. 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the head in, i. 190, 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burying of cut hair in, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tâif, hair cut on returning from a journey in, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamaniu, the, of the Bank Islanders, ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tana, disposal of unconsumed food by the islanders, i. 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarnow, reaping custom in, i. 335</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tartar Khan, ceremony on a visit by a stranger to a, i. 158, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; poems, the external soul in, ii. <ref target='Pg321'>321-324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ta-ta-thi tribe of New South Wales, rain-making by the, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tâ-uz, festival in honour of, i. 283, 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temporary kings, i. 228-234;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes hereditary, i. 228, 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tenedos, rites of Dionysus at, i. 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tenimber Islands, offering of first-fruits in the, ii. <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teutonic kings exercised the powers of high priests, i. 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Texas, initiatory ceremony among the Toukaway Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thammuz as a corn-spirit, i. 283, 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thann, May-Day customs in, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theban ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rams sacred at Thebes, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thesmophoria, the, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44-48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thlinket of Alaska, festival to the halibut by the, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thuringen, Whitsuntide customs in, i. 90, 91, 243;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mid-Lent customs in, i. 257, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>threshing custom in, i. 371</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tibetan New Year's day custom, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193-195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scapegoat, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197-198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiger, flesh of, eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reluctance to wound a, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tikopia islanders, ceremony by the, in cases of epidemic, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tillot, threshing custom in the canton of, i. 372</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timor, West, custom of a speaker in, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timorese rain-charm, i. 18</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timorlaut, married men not allowed to cut their hair in, i. 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disease-boats in, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tjumba, harvest festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todas, the dairy a sanctuary amongst the, i. 41;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buffalo held sacred by the, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tom-cat, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tona, the, of the Zapotecs, ii. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonga, king of, not seen eating, i. 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony in, with regard to sacred contagion, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of the first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg379'>379-381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tongues of birds given to backward children to eat, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonquin, the test of a suitable sacrificial victim in, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>selection of guardian spirits in, i. 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the monarchy, i. 119, 120;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings not allowed to be viewed in public, i. 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mode of royal executions in, i. 180, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expulsion of evil spirits in, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176-178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time of licence in, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toothache cure, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torchlight processions, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totem, a, is an object (animal, plant,
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
etc.) in which a man deposits his soul for safety, ii. <ref target='Pg337'>337-342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totemism, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337-342</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totems, sex, ii. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Touaregs of the Sahara, custom of veiling the face amongst the, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transmigration of divine spirit, i. 42-44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvania, rain-charm in, i. 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burying the carnival amongst the Saxons of, i. 255;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>carrying out Death</q> in, i. 265, 266;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-drenching in, i. 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom for preserving the crops from insects, etc. in, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvanian story of a soul, i. 126, 127</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Traunstein district, harvest custom in the, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travancore, transference of sickness in, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travel, purification after, i. 157, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tree-spirit represented by leaf-clad persons alone, i. 87-90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killing the, i. 240-253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for annually killing the, i. 247-249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the goat as an embodiment of the, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34-37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in effigy, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274-277</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human beings burnt as representatives of the, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277-285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirits give rain and sunshine, i. 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cause the crops to grow, i. 67-70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>influence of, on women and cattle, i. 70-74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; worship, i. 56-98;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in antiquity, 98-108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trees, bleeding, i. 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of, i. 59-61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of the dead believed to animate, i. 62;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inhabited by spirits, i. 62-65;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>planted at the births of children, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as storehouses of the sun's fire, ii. <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and cattle, i. 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trier, harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tukaitawa and his shadow, i. 142, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turks, parings from the nails preserved by the, i. 204;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Turks of Central Asia give backward children tongues of birds to eat, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turner's picture of the Golden Bough, i. 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turtle, the, not eaten, i. 163;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of the sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95-99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in the transmigration of human souls into, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twelfth Day customs, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tycoons, the, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Types, two, of animal worship, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Typhon, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57-60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrol, expulsion of witches in the, i. 181, 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>witches said to make use of the hair cut in the, i. 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>midsummer customs in the, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ualaroi, ceremony at initiatory rites in, ii. <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uapes of Brazil, treatment of girls at the age of puberty in, ii. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Udvarhely, harvest home in, i. 370, 371;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony with the last sheaf in, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uea, power ascribed to the souls of the dead in, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uelzen, harvest ceremony in, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uganda, custom of burning the king's brothers in, i. 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>king of, and his courtiers, i. 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ugi, dread of women's blood in, i. 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burying of cut hair in, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uliase, sprinkling the sick with spices in, i. 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unyoro, kings killed in, i. 218</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Upsala, sacred grove at, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utch Kurgan, sin eating in, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Val di Ledro, fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaté, burying alive at, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vegetation, spirit of, in human shape, i. 87, 88;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain at midsummer, i. 274, 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Veiling, i. 162, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venison not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vermin, respect shown by primitive people for, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129-132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestal fire, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; virgins, hair of, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victoria, Queen, worshipped by a sect in Orissa, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vine, not to walk under a, i. 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred to Dionysus, i. 321</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vintage, Phoenician custom at, i. 365</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virbius, legend of, i. 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possible explanation of his relation to the Arician Diana, i. 362;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the horse, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62-67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason why he was confounded with the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volders, threshing custom at, i. 374</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vorarlberg, fire festival at, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vosges Mountains, May Day customs in the, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wadai, veiling of the Sultan of, i. 163;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he must have no bodily defect, i. 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waganda, worship in, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walber, the, i. 84, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallachia, corn-drenching in, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanika, the, believers in the souls of trees, i. 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>do not shed the blood of animals, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanyoro, secretion of cut hair and nails by the, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>

<lg>
<l>Wanzleben, harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warts, cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warua, the, not seen eating, i. 160, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wa-teita, the, their reluctance to be photographed, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Water, kings of, i. 53-56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fairy, English superstition regarding the, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watjobaluk, the, and the bat, ii. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weather kings, i. 44-46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; omens, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weevil, the, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weiden, harvest custom in, i. 338</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Welsh custom of sin eating, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wends dancing round the oak-tree, i. 72</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wermland, custom among the threshers in, i. 378;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony with regard to the last sheaf in, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>West African rain-makers, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westerhüsen, reaping custom in, i. 334</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphalia, Whitsuntide customs in, i. 98;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 336; ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wetar, men injured by attacking their shadows in, i. 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition concerning the blood of women in, i. 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opinion of the inhabitants as to their descent, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheat-bride, a name given to the binder of the last sheaf, i. 346</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; dog, a name given to the binder of the last sheaf, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White dog, sacrifice of the, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mice spared, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitsuntide basket, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bride, i. 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs, i. 76, 77, 80, 87, 88, 90-96, 98, 242, 243-247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; flower, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; king, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; queen, i. 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiedingharde, threshing custom in, i. 378</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wild man, i. 243, 244, 248, 250, 270; ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wind, buying and selling, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fighting the, i. 28-30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wind-making, i. 26, 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wine the blood of the vine, i. 184, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abstention from, <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winenthal, midsummer fire ceremony in the, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witchcraft, protection against, ii. <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witches, expulsion of, ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolf, the corn-spirit as a, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3-7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolfeck, midsummer bonfire in, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women, superstition concerning the blood of, i. 185-187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; secluded, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238-242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and tree-spirits, i. 70-74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wotjaks, sacred groves of the, i. 65;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driving out Satan by the, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wren, hunting the, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140-144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>English tradition concerning the hunting of the, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wurmlingen, Whit Monday custom in, i. 242, 243;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>threshing custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yakut charm for making wind, i. 26;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices, i. 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yawning, Hindoo custom when, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yarilo, funeral of, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorkshire custom of the clergyman cutting the first corn, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yoruba, precautions against strangers in, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yucutan charm for staying the sun, i. 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New Year's festival, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yule boar, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29-32</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; straw, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zabern, May Day custom in, i. 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zacynthus, strength thought to be in the hair by the people of, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zafimanelo, the, not seen eating, i. 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zaparo Indians of South America, foods eaten and avoided by the, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zapotecs, high pontiff of the, i. 113, 114; ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom, i. 352, 353;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the tona of the, ii. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zealand, custom at the madder harvest in, i. 378, 379</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zend Avesta, directions by the, concerning the clippings of hair and nails, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus, a man's shadow lost on entering the sanctuary of, i. 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by an oak at Dodona, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Hera, representation of the marriage of, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoolas, qualities required for the king of the, i. 219</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulu rain-charm, i. 19;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in the reflection as the soul, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings put to death, i. 218, 219;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom in time of disease, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cannibalism, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>girls secluded at puberty, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Ihlozi of the, ii. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zuni sacrifice of the turtle, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95-99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totem clans, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zürich, fire festival in, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
